---
title: Gone With The Meme
tags: [fiction]
story_commentary: |
  This short story obviously started from a meme. It was joking on how
  "tbh bae idgaf" as a modern shorthand for the famous Gone With the
  Wind quote seems barely comprehensible to modern readers let alone to
  someone who existed before the modern internet, but I started picking
  that apart and figured it could be decoded by people living in the
  year Gone With the Wind actually came out just fine. It's a funnier
  story if it takes two huge companies and the US military to do it, but
  it might not even have needed that much effort. "TBH" is a
  surprisingly old abbreviation. Variations on "IDGAF" nearly as old.
  The biggest shift is in the writing style/structure is the casing,
  with lowercase abbreviations and acronyms far more common in modern
  text.

  Obviously the biggest fun here was trying to figure out how to send
  this text to 1940. Technology is built on incredible amounts of
  backward compatibility, it almost seems possible, especially when you
  think about how much of technology was built to be compatible with
  things that 1950s and 1960s AT&T and IBM built. Of course had to fudge
  it a little bit to make it seem plausible to reach the 1940s. There's
  also certainly inaccuracies and things that are technically incorrect,
  but make it a cleaner story. All of the research was mine and most of
  it was secondary sources because technical accuracy wasn't the goal of
  this story (amusement was), so I'm sure there are plenty of mistakes.

  The area code 347 was assigned in 1999 to provide additional phone
  numbers for the non-Manhattan boroughs of New York City as 718 was
  starting to feel exhausted, so these texts were intended to be just
  between two New Yorkers before what ever caused them to be routed to
  the past.

  Signaling System 7 was invented by AT&T in the 1970s. SMS text
  messages have always traveled on the Signaling System 7 infrastructure.
  SMS text messages can fall all the way back to being a modem call to a
  signaling trunk line. I had to give a lot of leeway to 1940s AT&T in
  the story to recognize SS7. AT&T didn't really start numbering the
  Signaling Systems or marking them with version numbers until SS5 (also
  from the 1970s; it had clear security issues which led to very fast
  jumps from SS5 to SS6 to SS7 all in the 1970s). Even in the 1970s "low
  speed" SS7 was 56kbps full duplex, so I was imagining a broken
  half-duplex compatibility fallback here to get it even as slow as
  roughly 25kbps modem calls. I still think that was probably too fast
  for 1940s tech, but that also gave me more narrative reason to bring
  in IBM as a foil.

  ASCII is indeed backward compatible all the way back to some American
  telegraphs (the A in ASCII is American, just like in AT&T) and most
  text messages today are encoded in UTF-8, the 8-bit encoding of
  Unicode, which is backwards compatible with 8-bit ASCII up until the
  highest 8th bit is 1. In text messages like these you'd expect a bunch
  of emoji today. I couldn't think of a fun way to send 1940 a Rosetta
  stone for emoji, as much as they might have loved to have one. IBM has
  indeed claimed EBCDIC superior to ASCII at various times in history,
  but it did ultimately lose in the marketplace to ASCII because ASCII
  compatibility was almost always cheaper.

  One of the most ubiquitous timestamps in computing today is known as
  the Unix timestamp. Designed for the Unix operating system, the
  timestamps mark seconds after the epoch date January 1, 1970, the year
  Unix was written. Interestingly, Unix was invented in AT&T labs, but
  the long term success of Unix was as much in spite of AT&T's best
  efforts than due to them.

  I did want to throw a bone to 1940s IBM here, because they needed one
  and real world IBM probably should have had more distractions in the
  1930s and 1940s given what they were up to for the German government
  of the time. The bone I found is as much or more a stretch as AT&T
  recognizing SS7 (1970s), though: key parts of the encryption algorithm
  for the JPEG format, still a common image format for text messages,
  did originate from 1990s research math in an IBM lab. The metadata
  format of JPEG also has similarities to IBM binary formats dating back
  to at least 1950s and 1960s mainframe software. Most of today's
  computers are still "IBM PC compatible", IBM's shadow is pretty long
  in computing, so their fictional counterparts maybe deserved to at
  least recognize a little bit more of themselves in the echoes of
  future text messages. JPEG was a silly way to do that, but felt
  fitting to the narrative even if it might be a stretch that it could
  be recognized at all, especially from just one image.
---

*Bell Labs, March 1940*

"Lab Director, would you mind taking a listen to this call we found?"

The earnest appearing tech at my office door seemed shy, but excited.

I didn't prefer to be interrupted in that moment, but it was rare for a
tech to come directly to me in the middle of the afternoon like this for
just a phone call, "What sort of call?"

"Some of the offices forwarded over some sort of strange phone call we
picked up being sent to the weird Area Code 347."

"What is unusual about that area code?" Sure I work for AT&T, but I'm a
lab director in the research labs, I don't know everything about phone
dialing.

"That area code doesn't exist, it's just not on the map. That's why it
bounced between a few offices before it was sent to us."

"So it's a garbage call? Noise in the system?" I might as well start
with the obvious questions.

"That's why we'd like your ears on this, Director, before we go chasing
ghosts in the system."

I shrugged and followed the tech to a workstation where I was handed a
headset and the recording was played for me. An oscilloscope was plugged
in showing the waveforms of the recording as it progressed. It began
with standard dial tones and then proceeded quickly in a mash of what
sounded like line noise but had very visible uniformity on the
oscilloscope. There were some very striking square waves that looked far
too regular to be just line noise. Then it returned to dial tones,
followed by more square waves. If it was garbage, someone had spent a
lot of time crafting it.

Having heard it I took in the name of the workspace and addressed the
tech, "That sure is interesting for garbage, Martin."

"There's one more twist; there were three more calls after this one to
the same number."

I sighed, of course there was more to this weird rabbit hole. "What are
your working theories, Martin?"

Martin scratched his chin, "One: Some sort of military encrypted signal
bleeding into the wrong line using a fake area code. Two: Some sort of
buggy IBM mainframe teletype piggy backing on one of our lines. Three:
Some buggy military IBM mainframe combination of the first two. Should
we ask through our defense contracts if this might be one of their
projects? The way it uses our dial tones seems like our proprietary
tech, but doesn't exactly match anything I know of. That would lead me
to suspect Theory One or Three the most, unless IBM is trying to hack
something they shouldn't."

I grimaced, "Let's try not to get the military involved just yet. Can we
slow this down, get printouts of it, somehow?" I had a technical
background myself in a different specialized mathematics research field
and I was feeling a bit rusty in some of the specifics of the practical
phone systems, but I was certainly intrigued at the wild shapes on that
oscilloscope. Even the sounds, as much as it sounded like line noise had
a regularity to it, a pattern.

"It's too fast."

"It is too fast?"

Martin looked almost upset, "Faster than any system we have running
today. We could use some mainframe time on this. We need a project code
to charge this to."

That was the gut punch to the lab's purse strings that I should have
expected, but Martin had done a good job getting me curious enough to
maybe want to spend a bit of money on it, "Well, I guess we're exploring
your second theory. Maybe IBM will tell us it is just another of their
experiments and we won't waste too much more time on it. Or maybe
they'll be just as weirdly intrigued by it to do some leg work on it for
free. I've got some contacts, let me discreetly reach out."

Back at my desk I dialed my "friend" Bob at IBM. I hated calling Bob for
a number of reasons, including that he was a giant prick, but for as
high up in IBM's red tape he had risen he still had modest engineering
chops and might possibly still chase the possibility of an engineering
puzzle with the eagerness of the nerd he used to be before IBM tried to
remold him into a black suit designed only for budgetary paperwork. He
picked up immediately and like the prick he was started straight into
dominating the conversation, "Hey Maggie. We missed you at the golf
course last week. I hit quite the eagle in the back nine, you should
have seen it. Miss too many more holes and you might fall way behind me."

I hated playing golf with that crew but keeping a somewhat regular
weekend play schedule with them I felt reminded them that I was worth
any two of them. I tried to steer the conversation back to why I was
calling, "Bob, my lab has picked up an engineering puzzle and we wanted
to make sure it wasn't some sort of IBM skunkwork project accidentally
abusing our lines. Something we think might be coming from one of your
mainframes."

I filled Bob in on it being from calls to an area code that doesn't
exist, we scheduled a pickup for copies of our tapes of the strange
calls.

Bob showed up to a conference room a couple weeks later with printouts
and a somewhat angry expression, "Maggie why are you wasting our time
investigating some sort of telegraph? This has to be from your side of
the fence with all the dial tones and ASCII."

"ASCII?" With a brute force like Bob I might as well wait for him to
explain and I glanced at Martin to make sure it was Bob doing the
explaining. It would help Bob blow off some of that steam. He loved
explaining things.

"At IBM we encode text in a well designed encoding we call EBCDIC. You
all at AT&T are the ones that like to insist on the hideous ASCII
because it is backwards compatible with old telegraphs, despite its
obvious deficiencies. You can clearly see some English text in ASCII in
key places of each call."

Bob pointed to highlighted sections in the ASCII decoded document
including "u up?", "babe?", "talk to me", "plz".

Bob turned to leave, but then turned back, "The engineers claim they
needed a good break from all the projects for Germany and enjoyed this
test, so I'll invoice you the friends and family rate for the mainframe
time, yeah? Still, though, it's wild, where did AT&T dig up a 25
kilobits per second telegraph?"

Martin almost choked on whatever warm beverage was in his mug, "25
kilobits per second? I knew it was fast, but that's impossibly fast."

"Roughly," Bob shrugged. Then Bob's expression changed again to
something like fascinated curiosity, "Wait? This isn't a prank? This
really is some sort of alien telegraph?"

I glanced to Martin and back to Bob, "You really know about as much as
we do. Thanks for the printouts, Bob. We'll let you know if we get more
of these alien telegraph messages."

Martin returned to my office in a few days with a bunch of analysis and
a few other techs, "We've got a lot of notes and some wild theories," he
began and I felt like I was all ears.

He starting pointing to repeating patterns near the visible English
words, "A lot of theories keep coming back to these undecodable patterns,
which recur in the plain text sections with such regularity we believe
that this encoding isn't actually ASCII but something derived from it,
using the highest bit in ways we don't expect. We suspect they are still
plain text and not encrypted, though. We don't know what language they
encode, but it seems regular enough to be some form of language. Given
the English words in between and the way the patterns seem to reflect
sentiment, we have suspicions it might be some sort of future
punctuation."

"Future punctuation? From the future? I think you need to walk me
through these wild theories a bit more," I had no idea what to think.

"Right, so that was a crazy theory I threw out for a laugh earlier, but
working from there started to unlock some of our other findings,
Director," Martin looked almost scared to admit the theory had started
from him, "for instance, these other neighboring bytes seem to increment
at the right rate to be timestamps of some sort. We cross-correlated our
phone log data and IBM's notes on these relative timings inside the calls
and they appear to align with an error of only a few wall clock
microseconds."

"Okay, timestamps, so these are definitely from the future?"

Martin nervously started rambling, as I find so many good techs are easy
to fall into, "They appear to be seconds counted after some sort of
epoch, so we don't know exactly what the epoch is, so we mostly only
know that these events are roughly 54 years after that chosen epoch.
That's too low to be something like the AD epoch, we wouldn't expect an
American telegraph in 54 AD, for instance. If we assume the epoch is
this century and say 1900, telegraphs from 1954 would be wild, but this
also doesn't seem to be tech from only 14 years ahead. We have reason to
suspect the epoch itself may be in our future. So much of the headers
and flow around these text blocks is a control and signalling system
like we would design, but it's message switched. We have enough growing
confidence in the message structure to further affirm that weird future
punctuation is text data and not message metadata. But speaking of
message metadata, that's where we keep finding more weirdness. The
timestamps we found, as mentioned—"

"Right, we've covered the timestamps. They are at least 54 years after
some point we don't know," I tried not to betray any impatience in my
voice, I just was hoping to short-circuit an accidental loop. "What's
'message switching' and why does its metadata matter?"

Martin took a deep breath, "Message switching is barely a theory right
now: instead of connecting a circuit and allocating all the bandwidth we
need for it up front in theory we could break things like phone calls up
into lots of smaller pieces and float them down large chunks a piece at
a time. A bit like sending lots of little postcards through the mail
instead of a single large book. No one is crazy enough to suggest this
sort of message switching, but if you have roughly 25kbps speed to
communicate with maybe it makes a lot more sense. I can barely imagine
what a full trunk of these sorts of messages would be like. That's a
massive amount of bandwidth, and probably just one trunk among many by
that point! We're lucky that whatever switching system is in charge of
these is only delivering us one specific phone number to phone number
interaction and not a whole regional office worth's. That sort of
bandwidth could have flooded our systems. It is incredible to think
about."

"So we expect that sort of message switching to be more than 14 years
out?"

"We have no reason to do it now. We don't even have most of the theory
of how it would operate at all yet. The people thinking about that sort
of network design probably aren't even working in this building yet if
this does come out of our labs. Of course, the big smoking gun seems to
be that we found the version number. These seem to be messages from a
Signalling System 7."

"We're on–?"

"3 mostly, maybe 3.5 if we are feeling generous with ourselves.
Signalling Systems are decades of work both to build and then to roll
out. That's possibly a lot of years. We think that version number is
likely accurate. If we assume the epoch start date is closer to some
future Signalling System release date we're starting to feel like we're
getting glimpses of what feels like the deep future. Right now a
favorite choice is if we built our next Signalling System mid-century,
1950-ish and it was so state of the art we thought it worth numbering
time after that point, and if that's it, are we getting messages from at
least 2004?"

"But in the future they've reverted to some sort of telegraph?" I was
starting to wonder if Bob was maybe right that this was some sort of
prank, but not on him.

"Partly. With weird future punctuation. That gets back to our suspicions
from other parts of the message metadata. We think this can carry audio,
text, video, and other things." Martin was excited like a puppy, "There
are fewer limits than any system we currently have. 25 kbps is probably
too low for real-time video, but if you send enough messages you could
watch a movie or something. Imagine the possibilities! Imagine the
insane bandwidth needs and how many phone lines they would need for
things like that! No wonder it is trying to message an area code we
don't know about yet."

The enthusiasm was fascinating and almost infectious, but I was supposed
to be wearing a business-minded hat on this side project, "So we've got
telegraphs from the future? What's the use of this? How much of this
tech can we reverse engineer and start building? How long until we can
send video over phone lines?"

Martin glanced around at his fellow techs who hadn't spoken at all yet,
but apparently now was when they were needed for moral support, "So we
were thinking that we should respond to these telegraphs."

"You want to try to send telegraphs *to* the future?" That certainly
wasn't where I was expecting this to go.

"Think of what more we could learn!"

"Wouldn't that be dangerous to the timeline if we learn something out of
order?"

"Weren't you just asking if we could reverse engineer tech out of this?"

I took a few seconds to gather my fury about that response, "Fine, but
do we even have the ability to send messages back?"

Martin indicated the pair that had accompanied him, "We think we can do
it. The dial tones are easy enough and the bootup sequences just after
them seem regular enough we could copy and paste them we think. Or at
least, a single channel of them, we think it's a paired call and
response and we only need to send one channel of the exchange and hope
the other side responds with the same responses. We think we understand
enough of the message format to make a reasonable attempt at faking a
message, and we just have to hope the system on the other end isn't
strict about it. The only real problem is—" Martin stopped and again
looked for some sort of moral support from his peers.

I waited patiently.

Martin finally took a deep breath, "It's still too fast for us. We'd
need some help."

I sighed, "You want me to waste more money on IBM computing time?"

Martin nodded and I worked on a plan to butter up Bob to help us send an
"alien telegraph" message. I realized it probably meant planning on a
few rounds of golf with that lout and his usual crew.

I was surprised that Bob seemed almost eager to help on this next step,
despite having been angry it wasn't a good, "proper" IBM protocol. I got
the feeling some of his engineers were wasting nearly as much time on
analysis of it as my techs have been. I was less surprised that Bob was
adamant this be a shared effort and the exact message contents must be
work-shopped between all of us. IBM didn't want to just be a dumb
conduit, even after acting like they had nothing to do with this effort.

After more meetings than it should have taken, thanks to some of the
weight of IBM's bureaucracy trying to crush our spirits, the combined
committee settled on trying to send a simple "Who is this?"

All of us were deeply surprised that responses occurred almost
immediately in short succession. IBM was faster this time at getting
printouts back to us, and it was basically the same committee, now with
something of a dedicated conference space in one of my labs. A few of
the IBM engineers had almost taken to working some days entirely from my
lab. (I have few illusions that at least some of it had to do with our
slightly more relaxed dress code. They probably relished any excuse to
dress down.)

Response message 1 was "y shout?" and message 2 was "u srsly gonna new
phone who dis me?" Both had plenty of "future punctuation" following
each. Response message 2 felt like a small win for my techs over the IBM
members of our committee trying to muscle into our turf. It was pleasing
to us to know that whatever this "future telegraph" was they still
called it a phone. We would take the small win there. Response message 1
got the most attention though because it caused some confusion and a lot
of small arguments.

Martin boiled down the working theories on "the shout problem" from
Response message 1 for me a few hours after a debate between him and one
of the IBMers got a bit heated, "Several of them from IBM have a working
theory that we should have included 'alien punctuation' along with our
message and that we should spend a lot more time researching the 'alien
punctuation'. I contend that IBM got sloppy with the teletext
transcription of our message and at the moment they won't admit to any
such thing. It's possible punctuation changed a lot in the future, but
given the overall sloppiness with punctuation in the messages we are
seeing, we don't think a lack of punctuation would appear to be shouting,
we think we have a simpler theory."

"What's the theory?"

"Most of our teletypes are upper case. Old telegraphs were upper case.
Most of IBM's teletypes are upper case. We think IBM just encoded the
message entirely in upper case."

"Why would case matter?"

"You've noticed all the messages we've gotten so far are entirely in
lower case, right? Some of us have been debating about that since the
beginning why all the text would be in lowercase, even though we are all
today so used to messages entirely in upper case, and our belief is that
we've come across evidence to fit our theory: if all uppercase is
'shouting', then all lowercase is a, possibly intimate, 'whisper' to
someone 'natively' using text communications. Given the speed of
responses, we think this is something of a text native medium. We just
need to get IBM to admit they encoded nothing but upper case to evidence
our theory. They want to waste more time theorizing about what we call
the 'future punctuation' despite us having no real basis to explore its
patterns, no Rosetta stone of any sort, plus no real belief from us on
the Bell Labs side that a lack of punctuation would mean 'shouting'.
Think about period versus exclamation mark: it's the one that's not the
default that is seen as shouting. That's been somewhat steady in English
text for a long time now. Future changes to punctuation or not."

It wasn't hard to prod Bob to admit they had indeed teletyped the
message entirely in upper case. I wasn't going to win a war with Bob's
team on entirely ignoring what they called the "alien punctuation", but
I did get Bob to admit enough defeat that it would be easy next time to
tweak their encoder program to encode only lower case no matter what
teletypewriter they chose to use, so long as we all worked together to
keep trying to find patterns in the "alien punctuation".

Even with "the shout problem" somewhat resolved amicably, any next
follow up message got swallowed in committee meetings. We agreed that
Response message 1 was probably a rhetorical question given the timing
proximity to Response message 2. No one could agree on an appropriate
response to Response message 2. Some wanted to try to mention that we
were in 1940 and had no idea what area code the other side was trying to
correspond with. Others were worried about the timeline repercussions of
admitting to anything of that sort. Some wanted to just repeat the first
message. Some wanted to ask what year the other person believed it was.
With clear timestamps in the message, even though we didn't know the
epoch date, some of us thought we'd get even more confusion back if we
tried to ask at all about time. Many of the IBMers still thought it
might be aliens so they wanted to ask about distance. They didn't
appreciate my techs pointing out that the number we were sending these
reply messages to was a supposedly ordinary New York City number (and we
felt any questions about distance would probably just get "New York City"
whether or not there were "aliens" at the other end). (We would not want
to confuse our IBM friends by telling them that the NYC return address
was via a trunk line that doesn't exist and our regional office in NYC
still doesn't understand how we are getting dials to nor from it,
despite our pressure to keep digging.)

Our weeks of deliberations were interrupted by Response message 3
arriving. It was simply "c any gud films l8ly?" with no future
punctuation at all. Martin, at my behest, worked very hard not to rub it
into the IBM faces that the "alien punctuation" was neither necessary
nor did a lack of them imply "shouting".

Thankfully deliberation on a return response to Response message 3 was
quicker and easier than our gridlock in responding to Response message 2.
Terrible grammar aside, "good films" was a pleasing enough conversation
topic. It seemed easy enough to talk about January's big release that
had been dominating our collective watercoolers and so it was decided to
send back "gone with the wind", emphasizing the lower case text as we'd
all agreed on after "the shout problem".

Response messages 4 and 5 were also received in short succession.
Response message 5 was a baffling "tbh bae idgaf" that stumped all of us
in the joint committee on alien/future communications. For as baffling
as Response message 5 was, though, Response message 4 also dubbed Binary
Object Alpha, was a huge confusing dump of binary computer noise with a
few strange bits of ASCII embedded that seemed incidental to the overall
binary object.

Where Response message 2 had felt like a small win for us on the "phone
teams", Binary Object Alpha had lit a strange fire in our IBM
counterparts. Though where we'd not been able to stop talking about
Response message 2, IBM got peculiarly silent and shy any time we tried
to have a frank discussion on Binary Object Alpha, just a weirdly subtle
seeming shift in that they thought they had won some sort of round. It
took a few days for me to corner Bob on a golf course to the get the
"straight talk" out of him on the subject. With a couple of cocktails
and a good few holes below par he was surprisingly forthcoming to me,
"We've been calling Binary Object Alpha the 'future photo'."

I couldn't help but grin, "So you agree with us now that this is
probably future communications rather than alien communications?"

Bob was surprisingly dark and sober seeming, despite my having loosened
him up a bit, "Yeah, there doesn't seem to be any remaining question on
that on our side."

I raised my eyebrow at that, because that was quite the statement. I
didn't say anything knowing that Bob was more likely to give me more if
I let him ramble.

Finally he bit into the silence, "It's the wildest thing. More bits of
ASCII, we think we've found a few more timestamps in your weird seconds
past the epoch thing, but other parts of this format feel familiar to us
like they have an unmistakable IBM thumbprint. If AT&T has won some sort
of war that the future of computing looks like 'phones' that message
each other over phone lines like weird telegraphs, we are heartened to
see that IBM still has its fingers on the scales and now ever more
confused how we lost this war. This future photo is a mathematical
marvel. It implies math that IBM hasn't invented yet, but seems likely
to us that it is IBM that will be the company to do so. How do we build
such marvels and still lose in the marketplace of machines? How did we
lose the war? Why are they using telegraph letters and weird timestamps
in this otherwise IBM looking format? Whatever it is, it's not fair, and
management wants us to shutdown future projects with you losers at AT&T
to avoid losing and to try harder to win the future, but so far we've
mostly only agreed to keep a lid on what our R&D employees can tell you
and an agreement to not discuss any technical details of the future
photo beyond that we definitely think it is a photo of some sort."

I thanked Bob for both the information and the warning that things were
about to get more complicated.

Eventually I circled back around to the work conversation, "So we can't
collaborate on Binary Object Alpha. What about Response message 5? Any
fresh insights on the IBM side? Thoughts on how we proceed? Any
surprises to bring to the next committee meeting?"

Bob hesitated in a manner that I didn't like, "So we may have
inadvertently gotten the military involved."

"What?"

"An executive may have said the words 'future photo' too loud and to
discourage looking too deeply into Binary Object Alpha may have passed
along the 'encrypted message' challenge of Response message 5."

"Without other context?"

"Uh, probably."

"Bob! Get me the name of your military contact you dumped that problem
on."

I had Martin help lead an effort to draft a clean executive summary of
the messages so far, our findings and speculation. The next "committee
for future communications" was in the office of a Lieutenant Colonel
Collins. Bob and a couple IBMers were there, despite the tension of
being the reason this escalated to a military question and the tension
of whatever was going on with Binary Object Alpha. Collins took his time
reading the executive summary and finished his reading with laughter,
which was not an emotion I expected.

Collins glanced at the assembled rag tag group, "None of you have
clearly spent that much time reading uncensored military communications
such as the military's love of abbreviations including rude ones, I
imagine. You mentioned Gone With The Wind. What's the most memorable
quote from that movie?"

Martin tried his best Clark Gable impression, "Frankly my dear, I don't
give a damn." That obscenity has been the talk of the town.

Collins pointed to Response message 5, "To be honest, babe, I don't give
a fuck." Someone gasped at the elevated obscenity. A couple of the
committee groaned at not getting it before when it seemed so obvious
now. "If I had to guess Binary Object Alpha is probably a picture of
Clark Gable, maybe even a movie still from him delivering that line."
The IBM folks glanced at each other with a weird mix of unpleasant and
pleasant surprise. I supposed they might excited to have a better target
to try to hit in reversing that future math.

It took a few more days of committee debate to find a response that we
all hated the least ("funny"), but just before we could send it we got
Response messages 6 and 7 in short succession "DON'T GHOST ME" and then
"fine, blocked u jerk". Response message 6 seemed to verify the shouting
theory, but 6 and 7 together seemed to paint a story for which we were
missing pieces. The committee's attempt (a couple more days later) to
send a reply failed with a number disconnected signal for that trunk
line we had been using to connect to the 'future'. Multiple more
attempts were made after that one, in faster succession. I've attached
this narrative summary to the final report of the committee. AT&T's
final hypothesis was that given the speed with which we received many of
these responses from the 'future' it seems to have been a medium for
rapid communications and the many days the committee needed to form
messages to send was a delay that probably violated social norms for
whoever sent us these messages.

We wondered if we'd see more of such messages some day, but still had no
idea how they had arrived in the first place.
