---
title: A Pattern for Redux with Epics in C# Dependency Injection
tags: [coding]
---

This is a day job project that for a bit I thought might spin out into
an open source library but the funny thing about it is that it has been
more of a chisel the statue out of the marble type of project. It
started from a complicated place and the further we've pushed it towards
Redux best practices the more it disappears into "just" being primarily
a pattern of C#'s out-of-the-box dependency injection.

(For some small context, the original design that this design migrated
away from was far more inspired as something of a telephone game to
Angular's libraries such as NgRx, which themselves were a telephone
game away from Redux.)

It still seems worth publicly documenting for the next team looking for
this pattern. I wish there was a library I could point to to install
this pattern into your project, hopefully this documentation will
suffice as a good starting point. To some extent, the lack of a need for
an external library is a small triumph and a proof that this can be a
good way to build your C# "view state" model, for projects that want a
ReactiveX-"native" alternative to state management and/or event bus
patterns such as MVC, MVVM, Mediatr.

# `RootAction`

The core type for this Redux design is `RootAction`. This is not a
particularly great name, but it does avoid conflict with
`System.Action<T>` (the `void`-relative of `System.Func<T, U>`). In
proper Redux fashion, this is a very simple type with only a required
field name `Type`.

```cs
public record RootAction
{
    public virtual string Type => $"{GetType().Name}";
}
```

There are a bunch of strong notes to be made here, some of which remained
debates for some time after moving to this pattern. The NgRx family never
fully understood the importance of Actions as a serializable type, but
it is a useful core principle to many Redux pattern benefits. Serializable
types can be output to logs for replay, for instance.

Related to replay, that is something the day job project never got around
to implementing. At one point Source Generators were explored to replace
the reflection-based `Type` seen here with something more useful to
[`System.Text.Json`'s polymorphic] support.

[`System.Text.Json`'s polymorphic]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json/polymorphism

The advantage to this form of base `Type` implementation was that a tree
of types was relatively easy to build. Example:

```cs
public record CoolFeatureAction : RootAction
{
    public override string Type => $"CoolFeature/{GetType().Name}"
}

public sealed record CoolFeatureInitialized(bool IsCool) : CoolFeatureAction;
```

One of the things that this also highlights is that the Redux world
best practice of writing "action creators" is handled automatically by
C# record syntax. The primary record constructor is already laid out as
a Redux-like "action creator", and provides similar refactoring benefits.

A few of the other tips about Actions from the Redux pattern best
practices that may be useful to keep in mind at this point: Actions are
generally named like Events, they are named as the "user interaction that
just happened" in the past tense. Actions should generally not be "mere
setters" (`FieldASet`, `FieldBSet`) but rather State *transactions* as
a high-level event (`EntireFeatureInitialized` with everything needed
to update `FieldA` and `FieldB` all at once).

## Option: Popping the Middle Layer of Actions

Another brief digression from JSON polymorphic debates was if the
`RootAction`'s `Type` property implementation should have been, assuming
Reflection was still fine:

```cs
public record RootAction
{
    public string Type => $"{GetType().FullName.Replace('.', '/')}";
}
```

In which case the inheritance tree might have been a little flatter in
exchange for using the namespace hierarchy automatically. (With the idea
of the `Replace` being to still prefer the Redux dev tools suggested `/`
namespace separator instead of .NET's `.`.)

## Performance Digression on Reference Types

In part from references libraries that heavily relied on .NET's value
types (typically, but not just, `readonly record struct`) to deeply
avoid nulls (at the risk of sometimes equally confusing "zeroed"
`default(T)` from structs) the application had picked up the premature
optimization of using value types for a lot of internal state data.

This was a performance problem that we caught early in the Redux
pattern refactor. It is easy to forget that value types are generally
passed by value which means *by copy* in many cases. Especially in a Redux
design you often can't afford all the memory of every State and every
Action to be copied for every Reducer (and Epic and view component, etc).

Don't forget that `public record` is shorter than
`public readonly record struct` for a good reason and is a good default.
Reference types aren't an enemy to performance in .NET, they are just as
often the solution. Don't forget to apply performance profiling tools
for real data from your applications and not just default to value types
because they sometimes help performance or null safety.

# Reducers

The heart of the Redux pattern is Reducers to apply Actions to State. In
C# we used a very simple `IReducer` definition from which a number of
things inherited, include a `Reducer<Action, State>` base type for single
Action reducers.

```cs
public interface IReducer<State>
{
    public State Handle(RootAction action, State state);
}

public abstract class Reducer<Action, State>
    : IReducer<State> where Action : RootAction
{
    public abstract State Reduce(Action action, State state);

    public State Handle(RootAction rootAction, State state) => rootAction switch
    {
        Action action => Reduce(action, state),
        _ => state,
    };
}
```

The base class is a pattern in C# you also see in things like Authorization
Policy Handlers, a type-safe "trampoline" from the generic `RootAction`
to a specific `Action` (we had less of a problem with a type parameter
sometimes shadowing `System.Action<T>` than a top-level type doing so).
(This is also Typescript influence here of dropping the `T`-prefix
semi-Hungarian notation for type parameters; though as with most C#
naming schemes the `I`-prefix for interfaces is maybe eternal at this
point.)

Because the trampoline is often the shortest way to write many Reducers,
the `IReducer<State>` method borrows the name `Handle` from places like
Policy Handlers so that `Reducer<Action, State>` can use the more domain
friendly `Reduce` as its more specific abstract function.

It's also important to note that `IReducer<State>` is intentionally and
*only* synchronous. That's an ancient Redux best practice. That will also
be something we return to as we get to Epics.

To round out our `CoolFeature` example we might have an example Reducer
like so:

```cs
public record CoolThing(string Name, /* … */ DateTimeOffset Created);

public record CoolFeatureState(
    bool IsCool,
    DateTimeOffset CoolStarted,
    IEnumerable<CoolThing> CoolThings)
{
    public static readonly CoolFeatureState Disabled = new(false, DateTimeOffset.MinValue, []);
}

public class CoolFeatureInitializedReducer(TimeProvider timeProvider)
    : Reducer<CoolFeatureInitialized, CoolFeatureState>
{
    public override CoolFeatureState Reduce(
        CoolFeatureInitialized action,
        CoolFeatureState state) => state with
    {
        IsCool = action.IsCool,
        CoolStarted = timeProvider.GetLocalNow(),
        // ASIDE: Injecting a TimeProvider is a great way to increase
        // unit testing powers of this reducer because you can test in
        // fake time with a FakeTimeProvider.
    };
}

public static class CoolFeatureExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddCoolFeature(this IServiceCollection services) => services
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureInitializedReducer>();
}
```

Note that while Reducers are required to be synchronous, they are still
free to inject and use other dependencies (so long as they are also
synchronous). Similarly, reducers may be state machines that use complex
calculations based on the current state to produce the next state. The
big restriction is *synchronous*.

# Important Digression into `Lens<A, B>`

Before we can talk about the Store and Slices, we need one more tool in
our toolbox.

In Typescript, ala the original Redux pattern, we can easily "slice" a
State via a string key of that state. Typescript is also friendly in that
this can be relatively type safe thanks to meta-typing tools like
`T[keyof T]`.

Doing that type-safely in C# is a bit more work. One of the tools we can
use to do it that is useful as a generic type for immutable data structures
can be borrowed from functional programming and is called a Lens. A Lens
is really just a type-safe *getter* from one item to another (given an
`A`, I want a `B`), and a type-safe *setter* in the other direction
(given a `B`, I would like an updated `A`).

There are several functional programming libraries that provide a
`Lens<A, B>` useful in C#, including [LanguageExt], but `Lens<A, B>`
really is just as simple as described, so we can also just implement our
own quite simply:

```cs
public record Lens<A, B>(
    Func<A, B> Get,
    Func<B, Func<A, A>> SetF
)
{
    public A Set(B value, A container) => SetF(value)(container);
}
```

There's a few other convenience functions you could implement (often
named `Update`), but that's the important heart of `Lens<A, B>`.

The importance of `SetF` in this form as `Func<B, Func<A, A>>` as the
underlying *setter* is maybe not obvious if you haven't spent enough time
in languages that support currying such as F# and Haskell, but is one of
the useful properties for making `Lens<A, B>` generically useful to
several of our needs.

One useful way to see it from Redux points of view is that
`SetF(someFixedValue)` creates just about the most simple type of Reducer
possible (given a State, yield the next State). It's a handy abstraction.

[LanguageExt]: https://github.com/louthy/language-ext

# Handy Digression into `ShareReplay`

We are taking a ReactiveX native approach to our Store that follows to
encourage consistent use of Epics (more on them later). I bounce enough
between RxJS and classic C# ReactiveX that I find these utility extension
methods handy to keep around to save my poor memory some small bit of
trouble:

```cs
public static class ObservableExtensions
{
    public static IObservable<T> Share<T>(this IObservable<T> source) =>
        source.Publish().RefCount();

    public static IObservable<T> ShareReplay<T>(
        this IObservable<T> source,
        int bufferCount) =>
        source.Replay(bufferCount).RefCount();
}
```

The RxJS names are little more evocative to me than remembering when to
use `RefCount()`.

# `ISlice<State>`

Redux best practices are to use a single Store to collect your entire
application state. This allows for easier debugging serialization and
centralization of some forms of developer tooling.

But you often don't want to reason with an entire application state all
at once. You are often working on a specific vertical feature and want
to write your Reducers and Epics (more on those later) from the
perspective of only a *slice* of your Store.

We start with the general interface design:

```cs
public interface ISlice<State>
{
    public IObservable<State> States { get; }
}

public interface ISubSlice<ParentState> : IReducer<ParentState>
{
    public void RegisterParentSlice(ISlice<ParentState> parent);
}
```

`ISubSlice<ParentState>` is the stranger of the two interfaces in this
design because it is designed to facilitate the dependency injection of
circular references. Each Slice can be seen as a large reducer in its
own parent. Each Slice also needs a reference to its parent to be able
to do that slicing work of outputting the subset of states relevant to
the slice.

The implementation of Slice follows from this dependency injection trick
plus one other simple one: the .NET DI container like many DI containers
supports injecting `IEnumerable<T>` to get all implementations of an
interface that have been injected.

```cs
public class Slice<ParentState, State>
    : ISlice<State>, ISubSlice<ParentState>, IDisposable
{
    private readonly IEnumerable<IReducer<State>> reducers;
    private readonly Lens<ParentState, State> lens;
    private readonly BehaviorSubject<ISlice<ParentState>?> parentSlice = new(null);

    public IObservable<State> States => parentSlice
        .Select(parent => parent is null
            ? Observable.Empty<State>()
            : parent.States
                .Select(lens.Get)
                .DistinctUntilChanged())
        .Switch()
        .ShareReplay(1);

    public void RegisterParentSlice(ISlice<ParentState> parent) =>
        parentSlice.Next(parent);

    public Slice(
        IEnumerable<IReducer<State>> reducers,
        Lens<ParentState, State> lens
    )
    {
        this.reducers = reducers;
        this.lens = lens;
        foreach (var reducer in this.reducers)
        {
            if (reducer is ISubSlice<State> subslice)
            {
                subslice.RegisterParentSlice(this);
            }
        }
    }

    public ParentState Handle(RootAction action, ParentState parent) =>
        lens.Set(
            reducers.Aggregate(lens.Get(parent), (acc, reducer) =>
                reducer.Handle(action, acc)),
            parent);
        // or with an Update helper implemented:
        // lens.Update(parent, parentState =>
        //   reducers.Aggregate(parentState, (acc, reducer) =>
        //     reducer.Handle(action, acc)))

    public void Dispose()
    {
        GC.SuppressFinalize(this);
        parentSlice.Dispose();
    }
}

public static class SliceExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddSlice<ParentState, State>(
        Lens<ParentState, State> lens) => services
            .AddSingleton(provider => new Slice(
                provider.GetServices<IReducer<State>>(),
                lens))
            // allow direct injection IObservable<State>
            .AddSingleton(provider => provider
                .GetRequiredService<Slice<ParentState, State>>()
                .States)
            .AddSingleton<ISlice<State>>(provider => provider
                .GetRequiredService<Slice<ParentState, State>>())
            // register for pickup by its parent
            .AddSingleton<IReducer<ParentState>>(provider => provider
                .GetRequiredService<Slice<ParentState, State>>());
}
```

Our `CoolFeatureState` might be part of a larger `RootState`:

```cs
public record RootState(CoolFeatureState CoolFeature)
{
    public static readonly RootState Initial = new(CoolFeatureState.Disabled);

    public static readonly Lens<RootState, CoolFeatureState> CoolFeatureLens =>
        new(state => state.CoolFeature, state => coolFeature => state with
        {
            CoolFeature = coolFeature,
        });
}
```

With Slice implemented we can fill out our example `CoolFeatureExtensions`
with the next registration piece:

```cs
public static class CoolFeatureExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddCoolFeature(this IServiceCollection services) => services
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureInitializedReducer>()
        .AddSlice(RootState.CoolFeatureLens);
}
```

Note that both generic parameters to `AddSlice` are cleanly picked up from
`Lens<A, B>` matching those parameters.

# `Store`

I think the implementation of our central Redux Store follows pretty
directly from our Slice implementation above:

```cs
public IActions
{
    public IObservable<RootAction> Actions;
}

public IDispatch
{
    public void Dispatch(RootAction action);
}

public sealed class Store
    : ISlice<RootState>, IActions, IDispatch, IDisposable
{
    private readonly IEnumerable<IReducer<RootState>> reducers;
    private readonly Subject<RootAction> actions = new();
    private readonly BehaviorSubject<RootState> states = new(RootState.Initial);

    public IObservable<RootState> States => states;
    public IObservable<RootAction> Actions => actions;

    public Store(IEnumerable<IReducer<RootState>> reducers)
    {
        this.reducers = reducers;
        foreach (var reducer in reducers)
        {
            if (reducer is ISubSlice<RootState> subslice)
            {
                subslice.RegisterParentSlice(this);
            }
        }
    }

    public void Dispatch(RootAction action)
    {
        var nextState = reducers.Aggregate(states.Value, (acc, reducer) =>
            reducer.Handle(action, acc))
        if (nextState != states.Value)
        {
            states.OnNext(nextState);
        }
        actions.OnNext(action);
    }

    public void IDispose()
    {
        GC.SuppressFinalize(this);
        states.Dispose();
        actions.Dispose();
    }
}

public static class StoreExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddStore(this IServiceCollection services) => services
        .AddCoolFeature()
        .AddSingleton<Store>()
        .AddSingleton(provider => provider.GetRequiredService<Store>().States)
        .AddSingleton<ISlice<RootState>>(provider => provider.GetRequiredService<Store>())
        .AddSingleton(provider => provider.GetRequiredService<Store>().Actions)
        .AddSingleton<IActions>(provider => provider.GetRequiredService<Store>())
        .AddSingleton<IDispatch>(provider => provider.GetRequiredService<Store>());
}
```

# `IEpic<State>`

The final part to this pattern that does a surprising amount of heavy
lifting is the concept of an Epic. Named after "lengthy story", an Epic
is the asynchronous workflow relative of the Reducer. Where Reducers
must be synchronous, the Epic can do anything Observables can do,
including calling `async/await` methods and running all sorts of side
effects.

Generally Epics observe Actions, the current state after an Action, and
return Actions.

```cs
public interface IEpic<State>
{
    public string Name { get; }

    public IObservable<RootAction> Create(
        IObservable<RootAction> actions,
        IObservable<State> states,
        IScheduler scheduler);
}
```

The `IScheduler` is explicitly provided to encourage testing with
`TestScheduler` and also because we found reasons at runtime to inject
specific schedulers without the Epic needing to be aware which.

The `Name` is useful for logging and debugging.

An example "Cool Feature" Epic might look something like:

```cs
public record CoolFeatureLoaded(IEnumerable<CoolThing> CoolThings)
    : CoolFeatureAction;

public class CoolFeatureLoadedReducer : Reducer<CoolFeatureLoaded, CoolFeatureState>
{
    public CoolFeatureState Reduce(
        CoolFeatureLoaded action,
        CoolFeatureState state
    ) =>
        state with { CoolThings = action.CoolThings };
}

/// <summary>
/// When Cool Feature has initialized, load any applicable CoolThings.
/// </summary>
public class CoolThingLoader(ICoolThingService service)
    : IEpic<CoolFeatureState>
{
    public string Name => nameof(CoolThingLoader);

    public IObservable<RootAction> Create(
        IObservable<RootAction> actions,
        IObservable<CoolFeatureState> states,
        IScheduler scheduler
    ) =>
        actions.OfType<CoolFeatureInitialized>()
            // Sometimes a .WithLatestFrom() is useful here if the
            // reducer calculates something, say in this case the
            // API wants the calculated CoolStarted time. Actions are
            // the "transaction model" for the Store, so the state
            // after an Action is observed should always reflect all of
            // the Reducers have run.
            .Select(action => action.IsCool
                ? Observable.FromAsync(async (ct) =>
                    new CoolFeatureLoaded(
                        await service.LoadCoolThings(ct)),
                    scheduler)
                : Observable.Return(new CoolFeatureLoaded([])))
            .Switch();
}

// updated registration
public static class CoolFeatureExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddCoolFeature(this IServiceCollection services) => services
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureInitializedReducer>()
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureLoadedReducer>()
        .AddTransient<IEpic<CoolFeatureState>, CoolThingLoader>()
        .AddSlice(RootState.CoolFeatureLens);
}
```

## Responsibility Digression about Epics

One thing that should be obvious from the Epic interface is that an Epic
may return the same Action it observes in the first place. This is a
recipe for an infinite loop.

The key wisdom when writing an Epic is that often attributed to
Spider-Man's Uncle Ben:

> With great power comes great responsibility.

Loops are a key flow control power in software development. Just as you
might use a `while` loop, you may find needs for Action loops in your
Epics. Just like working with a `while` loop, you need to make sure that
your loop condition is solid enough to avoid infinite loops, and you want
to make sure that your loop has all the other fast exits it may need.

# `EpicHost<State>`

The last big piece of pattern is initializing all the Epics at the right
point in application startup. This effort is left to a simple class
known as the `EpicHost<State>`.

```cs
public interface IEpicHost
{
    public void Initialize();
    public IEnumerable<string> EpicNames { get; }
}

public class EpicHost<State>(
    ILogger<EpicHost<State>> logger,
    IEnumerable<IEpic<State>> epics,
    IAction action,
    IDispatch dispatch,
    ISlice<State> state)
    : IEpicHost, IDisposable
{
    private bool initialized;
    private ISubscription? subscription;
    private IScheduler scheduler = Scheduler.Default;

    public IEnumerable<string> EpicNames => epics.Select(epic => epic.Name);
    
    private IObservable<RootAction> CreateEpic(IEpic<State> epic)
    {
        logger.LogDebug("Epic {Epic} starting in {Host}", epic.Name, GetType().Name);
        return epic.Create(action.Actions, state.States, scheduler)
            .Catch(error =>
            {
                logger.LogError(error, "Error in epic {Epic}", epic.Name);
                // Restart:
                return CreateEpic(epic);
                // NOTE: You might want to include a backoff strategy for
                // restarts or other additional debugging tools here.
            });
    }

    private IObservable<RootAction> CreateEpics() =>
        Observable.Merge(epics.Select(CreateEpic));

    public void Initialize()
    {
        if (initialized)
        {
            return;
        }
        initialized = true;
        subscription = CreateEpics()
            .Subscribe(
                action => dispatch.Dispatch(action),
                error => logger.LogError(error, "Error in {Host}", GetType().Name),
                () => logger.LogError("{Host} completed", GetType().Name),
            );
    }

    public void Dispose()
    {
        GC.SuppressFinalize(this);
        subscription?.Dispose();
    }
}

public static class EpicHostExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddEpicHost<State>(
        this IServiceCollection services
    ) => services
        .AddSingleton<IEpicHost, EpicHost<State>>();
}
```

`EpicNames` can be handy for debugging and testing.

Somewhere in your application startup path where it makes the most sense:

```cs
var epicHosts = services.GetServices<IEpicHost>(); // or constructor injection
foreach (var host in epicHosts)
{
    host.Initialize();
}
```

To finish up our Cool Feature example registration, it's final shape is:

```cs
public static class CoolFeatureExtensions
{
    public static IServiceCollection AddCoolFeature(this IServiceCollection services) => services
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureInitializedReducer>()
        .AddTransient<IReducer<CoolFeatureState>, CoolFeatureLoadedReducer>()
        .AddTransient<IEpic<CoolFeatureState>, CoolThingLoader>()
        .AddSlice(RootState.CoolFeatureLens)
        .AddEpicHost<CoolFeatureState>();
}
```

(You might want to inject an Epic Host for the `RootState` as well.)

# Bonus: DI Registration Tests

I found it useful to test that all Reducers and Epics were registered
in DI to avoid forgetting to register one (and then being confused why
it wasn't working).

It needs this helper function for Reflection:

```cs
public Func<Type, bool> ImplementsGenericInterface(Type interface)
{
    var genericInterface = interface.GetGenericTypeDefinition();
    return (Type targetType) => targetType
        .GetInterfaces()
        .Any(x => x.IsGenericInterface && x.GetGenericTypeDefinition() == genericInterface
            || x.GetInterfaces().Where(i => i.IsGenericInterface).Select(i => i.GetGenericTypeDefinition()).Contains(genericInterface));
}
```

With that in hand in a test context where you can test your appropriately
registered DI container, you should be able to use tests that look
something like (modulo your test framework and assertion framework
differences):

```cs
[Fact]
public void ReducersAreRegistered()
{
    var isReducer = ImplementsGenericInterface(typeof(IReducer<>));
    var reducers = typeof(Store).Assembly.GetTypes()
        .Where(t => !t.IsAbstract && t != typeof(Slice<>) && isReducer(t));
    foreach (var reducer in reducers)
    {
        Assert.IsTrue(
            Services.Any(desc => desc.ImplementationType == reducer),
            $"Reducer {reducer.FullName} should be registered");
    }
}

[Fact]
public void EpicsAreRegistered()
{
    var isEpic = ImplementsGenericInterface(typeof(IEpic<>));
    var epics = typeof(Store).Assembly.GetTypes()
        .Where(t => !t.IsAbstract && isEpic(t));
    foreach (var epic in epics)
    {
        Assert.IsTrue(
            Services.Any(desc => desc.ImplementationType == epic),
            $"Epic {epic.FullName} should be registered");
    }
}
```

# A Pattern for Redux with Epics in C# Dependency Injection

I think this pattern should feel built out of a lot of simple parts.
I feel like most of the work in this particular pattern is just the DI
"glue" to connect all the small lego parts of the pattern together.

I've had good success with the Epic Pattern for Redux in JS and I think
we saw some good use of this pattern in the C# project we were using this
pattern for (the view states and much of the business logic of a frontend
built in Blazor WASM).

The reliance of C# Dependency Injection in the way this pattern uses it
I think helps keep individual pieces small, focused, and easy to unit
test. I wrote a lot of Reducers and Epics in this pattern, with high test
coverage, and I appreciated it.

Given how much of the pattern seems to me to be most "DI glue" and
I couldn't see enough of a case to convert it to a C# library, I thought
it may still be useful to at least blog the pattern for posterity, as it
may be useful to other projects. In so far as this is copy and pasteable
code rather than an uncopyrightable generic description of a software
pattern, I believe the MIT license applies (no warranty, especially).
