---
date: 2007-10-22 02:06:25.158180
db_id: 404
db_updated: 2008-02-21 15:16:44.827787
layout: post
tags: humor
title: Technology Tidbits, Useless Skills and a Gaggle of Footnotes
---
First of all, Gutsy Gibbon (Ubuntu 7.10) has a few small improvements
that are already nice things for me.  The big thing is I was running
an older copy of Beryl and the Compiz Fusion bundled with Gutsy is
noticeably improved in a few areas.  Chief among them is it works like
a charm in suspend/hibernate.  [1]_  Also, fullscreen windows are
remembered correctly [2]_ and the bars don't overlap the window as
often.

Second of all, I'm still not sure I'm entirely sure what I'm doing,
but I broke down and bought an HD-DVD drive for my nice 720p+Xbox 360
setup.  At BestBuy I got the drive's worth of free movies to go with
it.  So I watched *Transformers* tonight [3]_ and I got *Batman
Begins* waiting [4]_, both free at checkout.  I got a raincheck from
them for my free copy of *Heroes* Season 1 [5]_, as they had just ran
out when I got there [6]_.  I've got a rebate for 5 more discs out of
a more strict selection that I'll mail shortly. [7]_  *King Kong* (Peter Jackson's recent remake) came in the box with the player and I look forward to watching that for the first time. Now I just need a surround sound receiver and I'll be all set.

So the past couple of days I've been thinking of some of my currently
"useless" skills.

I can swirl a professional looking ice cream cone from soft-serve
machines.  Possibly one of the most important things I learned in a
summer and a half of theme park food service, and not that tough to
learn nor that useful other than as a fun parlor trick [8]_ with
those ice cream machines that every buffet in the country is required
by a law of nature to have.  [9]_  10 year old girls find it amazing
when you have a good looking, tall ice cream cone.  Maybe some day
I'll find someone closer to my age that's easily impressed by feats of
dairy dexterity.  [10]_

Another useless talent to me is my nearly eidetic memory for music
lyrics.  Most days it merely serves as an annoyance as it makes me
more susceptible to earworms [11]_ than the average person.  But I can
do some amazing feats of Karaoke if I'm drunk enough.  I just try not
to drink too much in or around Karaoke bars for fear of being expected
to repeat a performance.  [12]_  I figure I could attempt to attract a
mate with this talent [13]_, but other than cruising disturbing nests
of Karaoke warbling I have no idea how to do it. [14]_

.. [1] I had a very simple script to shut Beryl down and had to
  restart it manually.  Only noticeable glitch now seems to be with the
  Reflection plugin.  [15]_

.. [2] Under Beryl I'd have to re-fullscreen every time.

.. [3] Definitely the best Micheal Bay movie I think I've seen and a
  weird mix of nostalgia and explosions.  Also, 2-Disc Special Edition.
  I haven't even looked at the special features disc yet.  I'm hoping
  for some cool things.

.. [4] I thought *Batman Begins* was brilliant when I watched it in
  the IMAX when it came out.  Definitely the best Batman film to date.
  Period.  [16]_

.. [5] $100 in HD-DVD discs alone, and awesomeness in the form of a
  box set.  You know where I'll be tonight (Monday).

.. [6] I got the last one the store in St. Matthews had today.  I took
  it as an omen that I needed an HD-DVD player.  After hearing about
  these deals last night I was surprised that they even had a single one
  at 3 in the afternoon.

.. [7] My choices currently look like: *The Italian Job*, *Pitch
  Black*, *Full Metal Jacket*, some U2 video concert or something [17]_,
  and *Troy*.

.. [8] I'm sorry.  I couldn't avoid it.  Please excuse the pun.

.. [9] Also, Jason's Deli locations.

.. [10] I'm sorry.  Please excuse the alliteration.

.. [11] You know what I'm talking about, those snippets of a tune that
  gets stuck in your head for the rest of the day or if your unlucky an
  entire week until you get so sick and frustrated and nearly insane
  you are forced to sing Old MacDonald's Farm backwards while drinking a
  glass of somewhat soured milk and hope that you don't have to call a
  witch doctor again for his song exorcism skills.  [18]_

.. [12] Or, worse yet, asked to tryout for *American Idol*...  Who
  knows what I might sign drunk in a Karaoke bar.  It would be weird to
  finally get over my months-long hangover to find I'm the next Aiken or
  Hung, paraded incessantly in front of a docile, `ovine
  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sheep>`_ public that can't get enough of
  me.

.. [13] Avian-style, dog.  You know it.

.. [14] I'm sorry.   I apologize for the over-extended and unnecessary metaphor.

.. [15] But I just realized I hadn't destroyed my hack script.  We'll
  see next time.

.. [16] I even just re-watched the last half of Tim Burton's first film
  and as much as I love that *camp gothic* style I loved the serious
  take on the matter more.  Fingers crossed for *The Dark Knight
  Returns*.

.. [17] Not really interested in *Firewall* (saw some of it, bleh) or
  *The Frighteners* (horror, sigh), so U2 is last option for that
  category.

.. [18] Also, I called the witch doctor and he told me what to do.  He
  said...  "ooo ee ooo ah ah, ting tang wanna wanna bing bang..."