---
date: 2008-07-21 15:47:08.570508
db_id: 477
db_updated: 2008-07-21 15:47:08.570565
layout: post
tags: world-design batman films
title: My View for the Next Batman
---
I don't need to review *The Dark Knight* as many, many others have
already done so and have said just about all I could say on the subject.
Yes, I think it is the best comic-based film to date.

Moving on, I have strong opinions on things that I want to see from
further Batman films and after sharing a few of them in recent
discussions I thought it might be fun to catalog them in one place and
open them up for debate.  I'll actually focus on my more controversial
choices and hopefully someone will be willing to argue that I'm crazy.
Plus I'm not going to follow any one Graphic Novel line-up, and I know
that drives some people crazy.

I doubt that this is where the next film will actually go, but if
someone actually involved in the films wants to use these ideas (and I
doubt they'll spread that far), I hereby offer them for free with only
the request that I get a small "inspired by" credit.  Heh.

The big tenet that I want to get across, the theme to what I'd like to
see in the next Batman is that I think its finally time that we see "The
World's Greatest Detective" side of the character finally make it to the
big screen.  Both of the Nolan films offer glimpses, but I think it
would be cool to see a good "puzzler" film that attempts to leave the
audience guessing just as much, if not more, than Batman.  (I think
Nolan has the chops for that given *Memento* and *The Prestige*.)

The only other thing that I would want to do is establish "the reign of
the Joker".  I realize that it may seem too early to recast the role, but
I think that even sight unseen the Joker should still seem to have some
influence on Gotham City.  It's something that I've criticised Tim
Burton specifically for because in killing the Joker in his Batman film
he essentially eliminated one of the biggest catalyzing forces in the
Batman world.  As a fan of the animated series I wouldn't mind if the
Joker were portrayed entirely off-screen, perhaps with a few small lines
from, for instance, Mark Hamill.

Here's the villain slate that I think would work very uniquely:

A Plot: Mad Hatter/The Riddler
------------------------------

The `Mad Hatter`_ and `The Riddler`_ more than any other two Batman
rogues, to me, seem cut from the same cloth.  Even beyond the obvious
passion both have for dressing in green, in recent variations at least,
there is the fact that both are generally written to be extremely smart,
deft challenging foes to Batman's intellect.

But it's the differences between them where I think an interesting story
can develop.  The Hatter is more insane, but more apt to use devices, of
which he seems to have some skill.  The Riddler is more well known from
his 60s appearances and Jim Carrey's bizarre turn at the role.  I could
see using one as the foil for the other.  For instance, set up a small
puzzle with the Mad Hatter and follow it with a wilder one from The
Riddler.  If you do it well you get an interesting segue from the mania
of the Joker (as expressed through The Hatter's Lewis Carroll fixation)
to the no less OCD but all the more cerebral Riddler.

I could see recasting The Hatter in more of a "digital hacker" light and
getting good play from that... something of a cyber-terrorism avatar of
chaos and mania, the Joker of high technology if you will.  (The only
issue here being the need to avoid obvious comparisons the Matrix's
non-scholarly usage of Carroll, but I could see using that to some
advantage as well.

.. _Mad Hatter: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mad_Hatter_%28comics%29
.. _The Riddler: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riddler

B Plot: Scarecrow, establish Harley Quinzel?
--------------------------------------------

I'll admit that I'm a bit of a Scarecrow_ fan and think the character
deserves more screen time.  I think that the character could become very
useful to pushing the "asylum insanity" to the next levels, particularly
given the loss of Ledger.  I've always seen it somewhat fascinating the
dark role of Arkham in Gotham City, as it becomes the "rest stop" of
just about the entirety of Batman's rogues gallery.  Unlike just about
any other superhero, we know where Batman's villains hang out when they
aren't around, they are left to pick their wounds and plan their next
escapade in Arkham.  There's the dynamic that as Gotham gets cleaner and
safer Arkham twists crazier and in Batman's Gotham crazy is something of
an infectious disease.  Just having the Joker locked down in Arkham in a
straight jacket would send entire wings into sniffles of insanity.

What better way to explore that powder keg than to do a small bit on the
attempted rehabilitation of Dr. Crane, once a well regarded psychiatrist
of that very same institution?

I think that leads well to introducing another psychiatry-based villain,
the young `Dr. Harley Quinzel`_.  There's an interesting contrast
between Dr. Crane's origin story and Dr. Quinzel's.  Harley follows the
Joker's madness in a hideous combination of Nightingale Syndrome and
Stockholm Syndrome.  The pair end up exemplifying the worst elements of
the abusive relationship, and yet, at least in the animated universe,
there is some small temperance of the Joker's worst qualities by the
influence of Harley, in so far as his mania can even hope to tempered.
On the other side, Harley's relative sanity to the Joker gives her a
better ability to blend in with the rest of Gotham, and the Joker's
influence can send her to doing violent chaos in more structured
environments than Joker himself could manage.

I would think that it would be just a bit of a nugget to simply
establish Harley Quinzel within Arkham, perhaps foreshadow her later
fall under the Joker's wing through a working relationship with a
rehabilitating Dr. Crane, who might serve as something of a mentor of
her psychology work.  But just set the character up for that film when
people will mind a recast Joker less, because to truly build the
character you want to tell her determination and single-mindedness
building to her helping the Joker escape Arkham.  You probably want a
good Bat-girl to act as a stronger counter-point to Harley.  In fact, if
you wanted to propose a brilliant Bat-girl starring vehicle, Harley seems
like the perfect choice for the major villain.

.. _Scarecrow: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarecrow_%28DC_Comics%29
.. _Dr. Harley Quinzel: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harleyquinn

C Plot: Hint at Scarface
------------------------

To somewhat resolve the Mafia plotlines of the first two films I think
it's time for a new Mafia boss to rise, on the outskirts of the film, in
rumor and perhaps with very little actual screen time, and I think that
boss should be Scarface_.  There are a lot of people that don't think
that Scarface has the realism necessary to fit in the Nolan continuity,
but I argue that Scarface has precisely the mania necessary to succeed
the Joker in destabilising the Gotham City Mafia.  Scarface and his
"handler" The Ventriloquist are actually quite frightening Mafiasos,
particularly because the sum is much scarier than the parts.  There's
something chilling about the man whose violence has migrated to a puppet
extension of himself.  There's something more chilling about a Mafia
head that ultimately cannot be destroyed because he literally is a
figure head, a puppet...

If done subtly and "in the wings" I think things could be quite
interesting.  The difficulty would be in skirting "Mr. Hat" campiness,
but I think it would be easy enough to achieve "Penguin-levels of
almost-non-camp".

So that's the villains that I think might lead to good Batman storylines
in the Nolan continuity.  Feel free to tell me where I'm crazy or steal
my ideas for fan fic or movie scripts...

.. _Scarface: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarface_%28comics%29