---
date: 2008-10-06 02:40:07.793049
db_id: 499
db_updated: 2008-10-06 02:40:07.793092
layout: post
tags: games game-design
title: On Serious Games and the Culture of Amateurs
---
I just finished *Halting State* in about a week, as it appeared to be
written just for me as I had got the impression from the reviews I had
read last year.  The following discussion was further enhanced,
tangentially at least, from the book and I debated including spoilers
but instead may save that for a follow-up or an "of the Moment" post.

At the `IdeaFestival lecture by Jane McGonigal`__ one of the few
respondents in the brief Q&A session was a surgeon and he spoke of the
increasing video game-like nature of surgery (remote operations using
video and sophisticated telemetrics) and pointed out to the assembled
that with a decline in professionals interested in surgery that we are
ever closer to seeing "amateur video game surgeons" taking over surgery
operations.  He asked Ms. McGonigal, albeit as an indirection to asking
the assembled crowd and I paraphrase, "Does that scare you like it
scares me?"  I'm going to come back to this question, but I thought it
more interesting to take the question by starting in easier territory
with a couple of examples that fascinate me...

__ /2008/sep/28/ideafestival-2008/

`Zombie Squad`_ is a community survival program, somewhat akin to Boy
Scout civic duty game (levels, badges), where members are encouraged to
think about disaster survival and recovery by thinking about the (wink)
*inevitable* Zombie Apocalypse.  To be perfectly honest, how lame does
`Community Emergency Response Team`_ sound in comparison to joining a
**Zombie Squad**?

.. _Zombie Squad: http://www.zombiehunters.org/
.. _Community Emergency Response Team: http://www.citizencorps.gov/cert/

Plus, Zombie Squad is rich in game potential...  it's not hard to come
up with cool concepts for "zombie scenarios" that test individuals and
teams of players using modern gadgets (custom software for GPS-enabled
cellphones, etc...) and its not hard to keep people playing those when
they get a spare Weekend.  How many people would get a kick out of being
a "Level 24 Zombie Hunter, with +5 Camping and +7 Navigation"?  The more
interesting survival skills you encode into the games the more
interesting your community gets.  Custom software becomes additionally
handy in real disaster scenarios...  it's not a far cry from modeling a
zombie horde to modeling a flood path or forest fire.

Are amateur emergency response/survival crews scary?  It's quite obvious
to me that during World War 2 America built a large civil defense
infrastructure and it seemed obvious at that time that such a thing was
outright crucial.  The shame lies, perhaps, in the immeasurable talent
and training that has been "lost" to time in this area.  Groups like
CERT attempt to make up the difference, and it is easy to say that just
about all of us could benefit from such training, but it's hard to get
people interested or to balance civil emergency training with our busy
lives.  We absolutely should encourage whatever amateur interest we can,
and games certainly seem a key path to doing so.

Perhaps that example is too obviously on the pro-amateur side of the
fence from amateur surgery...

VATSIM_ uses off the shelf flight simulators and networks them into a
simulation of contemporary air traffic systems.  VATSIM "players" often
take things extremely seriously, including players recreating existing
traffic patterns in "virtual airlines" such as the `Delta Virtual
Airline`_.  One key ingredient to a simulation of air traffic is the air
traffic controller.

.. _VATSIM: http://www.vatsim.net/
.. _Delta Virtual Airline: http://www.deltava.org/

Are amateur air traffic controllers frightening?  VATSIM air traffic
controllers are encouraged to focus on learning their nearby airport(s)
so that they can get a real and serious knowledge of the surrounding
terrain.  VATSIM provides an air traffic control software that, I'm
told, is almost exactly what real air traffic controllers use, the
difference being that instead of feeding RADAR/etc data to the console
the system feeds data gathered from instances of flight simulators.
VATSIM logs the hours that are spent in ATC, and peers log safety
ratings.  Air traffic controllers in VATSIM are expected to follow
strict apprenticeship programs and graduate through levels that I'm told
are nearly as rigorous, if not more so, than their "real" counterparts.
I would bet that many end up taking these virtual jobs more seriously,
because they are "games", or at least, because they are fun.

I think the better question is not whether this is a frightening tool,
is to instead ask, given the assumption that a person meets security
screenings, do these skills actually apply back to the real world?  I
think anyone giving such devotion to a trade (even if "only in a game")
can be an asset under the right circumstances.  There's a chance of
performance anxiety under real "life or death" circumstances, but beyond
that are there any real skills to air traffic control that cannot be
learnt in simulation?  (I don't know, I'm not an air traffic controller,
but I'm betting that air traffic control is one of those jobs that can
be wholly embedded in simulation given enough pressure.)  I'm not saying
that VATSIM air traffic controllers should take over air traffic control
from the guys in the towers getting paid to do it, but I am thinking
that given an emergency or a disaster I wouldn't mind knowing that air
traffic controllers could "call up those simulation guys with all that
experience" to fill in in a crisis and offer a few extra eyeballs to any
problem.  If latency could be tightly controlled it would be interesting
to see if the same game simulation tools could be swapped as needed to
real world data in real time, and set that up as an emergency protocol.

That brings us to the next tougher question: are simulation-trained
amateur pilots frightening?  Trade that for another rhetorical question:
How many professional pilots are **not** trained by simulation today?  I
don't know about you, but to me 1400+ hours logged in simulation (a
Delta Virtual Airlines Senior Captain mark it seems) seems pretty
impressive.  (That's nearly 9 months of an 8 hour day job, 5 days a
week, 4 weeks a month.)  There's a narrow gap between the training
simulators of actual airlines and the off the shelf simulators used by
these virtual airlines, and I bet its continually growing smaller.
(Sure there might be large hardware differences, but I think to some
extent that becomes a red herring.  How much different can a physical
dial gauge be from a virtual dial gauge on screen?  How necessary to the
skill of flying is it that a pilot need to feel the actual gimble and
gyre of the craft as force feedback?  I could see it just as easily
being a useless burden of excess information...  again, not that I'm a
pilot and I could be wrong.)

As much as people may not want to admit it, from my armchair I see only
a fine line distinction from the professionals that fly for real and the
**serious** students of the game that just "play it as a game".  Even
"just a game", people take games **seriously**.  Even "just a game"
people **learn real skills**.  Again, I'm not saying that a VATSIM pilot
should be hired immediately into a real airline, only that given the
situation of an emergency or remote operation of a cargo plane I could
imagine seeing qualified, tested, and skilled VATSIM pilots (that meet
security background checks, naturally) at the bottom of the "list of
pilots to call in an emergency".  Hopefully we would never see such a
day come around, but are we prepared if it does?  How fast, in an
emergency, could (barring latency issues, again) an airline put remote
operation of an airplane in the hands of talented simulation pilots?

I don't see it as that far of a leap from airline pilots back to
surgeons...  Given an adequate enough simulacra of real surgery, with
good feedback and proper skill testing and scoring I don't think it's a
huge scary thing if "America's Next Top Brain Surgeon" is some "gamer
dude" with amazing dexterity playing some "game console"...  If you can
embed all of the necessary knowledge from medical school into a powerful
collection of game mechanics, game feedback and powerful failsafes, and
in turn train/discover quantified surgical talent, then why shouldn't
you?  At the very least, discovering talent from video games and then
encouraging them to expand that into real knowledge and professional
work, is something to be encouraged.  Is a test of a player's dexterity
and ability to learn a complex game system that much of a stretch from
the centuries old system of rote memorization for entrance to a medical
school?

I've seen what dedicated gamers can perform with the relatively
imprecise input model of the dual analog stick world.  I can't even
imagine what dexterity might result if you give such people a reason to
dedicate themselves to such depths with devices of better precision and
tests of dexterity with more quantifiable application to the real world.

Industrialization has generally resulted in the decomposition of complex
jobs in smaller, easier sub-parts that "anyone can do" through something
of a process of "dumbing down".  To some extent that's only helped to
elevate our respect for the professions that we've yet to industrialize
or automate down to a lowest common denominator.  The key here is that
the "game-ification" and subsequent culture of amateurs that might
follow isn't exactly industrialization, for the most part it is not
about making complex jobs easier so much as it is about enabling more
people to learn complex jobs in more forgiving or more competitive or
more enjoyable ways.  Not everyone learns equally well in an academic
setting, and not everyone wants to be a doctor just for the potential
salary.  There is a place, I think, for "fun", for evaluating things
from the standpoints of "Is this the best feedback we can provide here?"
and "Can this knowledge be institutionalized or learned through
alternative means, such as burnt into the brain through the repetitions
that can be easier done in a game/simulation setting than rote memory in
a classroom setting?"

Just imagine if all of the grind put into a game like *World of
Warcraft* actually went toward people learning real skills ("Dude, I'm a
Level 30 Tensor Field Wizard!  That's like a third of Brian Greene's
level!").  Sure, it probably won't lead to amateur manifold theorists
tearing the universe a new one for the lols, but it might at least
improve Humanity just a bit...  There is a lot of room to use games to
attract people to old high and mighty professions and a lot of room for
the old high and mighty professions to take a step back and ask
themselves how they can make better replacements for themselves through
games technology, know-how, and a spirit of fun.  Maybe the surgeon
should have been asking how to better the path leading to his career, or
to work to better define the boundaries between the reality of his field
and any possible simulation of it and how to in turn teach that
difference to a gamer culture, than to worry about gamers mindlessly
replacing "talented, knowledgeable professionals" like silent and
malevolent pod people, without the consent or oversight of the rest of
the world...