---
date: 2010-02-02 18:23:00.212896
db_id: 559
db_updated: 2010-02-02 18:23:00.212923
layout: post
tags: games
title: 'Game of the Moment: Mass Effect 2'
---
I feel the *Mass Effect* team is slowly stumbling in the direction of
using game mechanics that best fit the story being told. It is
fascinating to watch them do so from such a different direction from my
own. I was raised, to an extent, by Tim Schaefer's experiments in this
direction and *Double Fine* is certainly the model for me in terms of
choosing game mechanics that fit a world. It is silly that gaming has
named its genres after collections of mechanics and systems, with the
boxing constraints that entails, rather than after anything more
meaningful.

*Mass Effect* comes from a pinnacle of Western RPG orthodoxy. I respect
the talent and skill represented in Bioware's catalog. I've bought many
of their games over the years, and yet *Mass Effect* games are thus far
the only ones I've beaten. I even beat them in back to back marathons,
an altar offering to a gaming god as yet unnamed that gives me some
small recharge in my interest in possibly working in the industry. (Hire
me.)

As someone else pointed out, it has been useful to throw *Dragon Age*
into the mix for added perspective. *Dragon Age* is very much somewhere
near the apex of the orthodox western RPG. It's a fascinating collection
of systems, certainly, but one that more often than not distances me
from the games.

*Mass Effect*, the first, pared down the required systems, and *Mass
Effect 2* only continues the surgery, trying to focus on the meaningful
stories and necessary systems. It's a fascinating progression that
belies the traditional nature of game sequels as generally more complex
over time. *Mass Effect 2* is easily my favorite Bioware game to date,
given how much it throws out and re-evaluates as much as anything that
it does leave in. (There's a Zen koan in that, of course.)

I have a few minor nitpicks: I liked the elevators of the first game,
and I missed the Mako and wouldn't have minded at least one interesting
Mako outing. My biggest disappointed was the small weapons tech retcon
that was used in an attempt to avoid a larger retcon. I have thoughts on
how it might have been done better, but I'll omit them from this long
enough post. I also thought that certain plot themes were odd in their
under-developed state--- the parallels between Saren's undoing and
Shepard's path in this game. I assume that some of that will come up in
the third game, of course.

Mostly I spent *Mass Effect 2* grinning. From every random cameo, to
feeling like a badass with magic powers, it really felt like this galaxy
belonged to my Shepard, and that's what I like to play. I was amused to
find the story of Blastos, both in game and out. There are some
surprisingly funny moments, some surprisingly touching moments, and
there's not much more to want from a story. (Although I wouldn't mind a
surprise twist that places me to work on ME3, if anyone has any Bioware
connections...)

.. vim: ai spell tw=72
