---
date: 2010-07-28 16:38:41.940073
db_id: 572
db_updated: 2010-07-28 16:38:41.940112
layout: post
tags: sci-fi television
title: On the Unfulfilled Potential of Sliders
---
=======================================
On The Unfulfilled Potential of Sliders
=======================================

The television series *Sliders*, a mid-90s series about sliding between
parallel worlds, has come up in conversation a few times recently. [1]_
I still believe that *Sliders* had the potential (still does, given the
right reboot) to be a strongly American counterpoint to *Doctor Who*--
the type of anthology series that could last, and maybe even say
interesting things about American culture along the way.

I actually watched the first few seasons of *Sliders* as they aired. I
wasn't able to follow the final move to the Sci-Fi Channel, but did
catch most of its seasons in rerun. (It does flavor some of my opinion
of those seasons that I originally watched them out of order.)

The first season, in particular, of *Sliders* has some great moments,
and sets up a lot of potential that ultimately never quite gets followed
through. Most importantly the show never quite hit the right rhythm
across multiple seasons. Part of that is the changing requirements of
the double network swap, and part of that is that the show just didn't
have the "luck" necessary for longevity.

The Formula
===========

An American whiz kid latches on to an effective, albeit not entirely
accurate or sound, method to slide between alternate earths. Along for
the journey are his girlfriend, his professor, and a down-and-out soul
singer who happened to pass by.

Each episode or so brings a new slide to a different earth, that may be
better, worse, or entirely different than the last destination. It is
easy for episodes to be one-offs, and to tell anthologized stories.

For the most part the focus is on the journey, rather than the
destination of "home", which is elusive (and possibly illusive), and
generally impossible, with the show's tech, to pinpoint *exactly*.

The key piece of technology is a remote control-like device. (See `The
Technology is Broken`_ and in particular `A Basement-Full of Equipment`_
below for what began as a footnote here.) A remote control between
worlds, albeit a finicky and unpredictable one.  (Which seems quite
appropriate as American keystone device to emulate-- sliding as channel
surfing.)

Versus *Doctor Who*
-------------------

The American "whiz kid" archetype seems almost as common as *Doctor
Who*'s professorial archetype. I certainly prefer that *Sliders*' tech
is grounded in human genius, rather than alien intelligence. Both
*Doctor Who* and *Sliders* rely heavily on the companions the main
character brings with them.

In both, the technologies are often buggy. Certainly I think *Sliders*
is at its best when the technology is buggy and an impassive force of
nature. I think many agree that many of the more interesting *Doctor
Who* stories revolve around the TARDIS being a finicky, sometimes broken
extension of the Doctor's personality.

One key difference, I think, is the way the shows respond to
horror/fear. Horror tales is a key part of *Doctor Who*'s balance, and
*Doctor Who* generally works with a healthy dose of it. This is partly
because the Doctor himself is often older and scarier than
horror-of-the-week. This often works well in *Doctor Who* because the
audience can borrow both the Doctor's Companion's dread and their trust
in the Doctor to make things right in the end and protect them from
their fears.

On the other hand, contrary to the balance that certain seasons pushed,
I think *Sliders* is often at its worst when there is a heavy amount of
horror/fear tales. *Sliders* feels much better when there is a better
balance of hope and faith in humanity against the fear.

Longevity
---------

I think that *Sliders* was in a good place for longevity (and could well
be, again). Passing the baton between companions is quite
straightforward in *Sliders*. (More so, I think than *Doctor Who*.)
Companions are generally free to stop at any slide, hopefully with a
fitting character arc. More importantly it is easy to leave characters
in good places (slide somewhere that needs just their expertise or
compassion). It's also the easiest to schedule the inevitable return
cameos (doppelgängers are everywhere), and even to keep their memory
alive just by intelligently dropping hints of their doppelgängers'
existence, just off screen.

However, I have heard it said, and I have heard some claim the series'
final season supports this point beyond question, that the concept can't
support the changing of the guard for the main character spot. I don't
think that this is true, I just think that a combination of bad luck and
few wrong choices set things up to seem like a larger failure than they
should have been.

I think there are two key ingredients in what I see as the failure in
trying to move the series forward, past its Jerry O'Connell stage: home
and relatives. 

The show is obviously about the *journey* home, but home isn't
necessarily the **real** destination, and I think too many people
focused on that (and the series gets really muddled around and because
of that)-- it's a classic epic journey about a character learning more
about themselves, and perhaps landing some sort of catharsis. In the end
it shouldn't have mattered if Quinn Mallory ever landed at his exact
"home" universe, because ultimately that wasn't what he was looking for;
it was only what he thought he was looking for.

It is a key piece of the Doctor's makeup that the regenerations are
still, ultimately, him-- complex, ineffable and god-like figure. For
whatever well intentioned reasons, the attempted mythology of *Sliders*
tries to make the main slider too Doctor-like, by invoking retconned
family members and mind transfer silliness. I don't think it works, and
I think it ignores key strengths of *Sliders*.

The technology of *Sliders*, as it is setup, is that it is built on
(pseudo-) *science*. It is technology that anyone can use, but more
importantly it is technology that anyone can build, given the right
quirky combinations of genius, intuition, and luck. In the show, Quinn
Mallory could have just given the timer to just about anyone and expect
them to make their own journey. He might be kind and make sure that the
recipient has the requisite pseudo-physics to fix things when they go
pear-shaped, but that's about all that's needed.

More interesting, to me, is the idea that you skip to the next nerdy gal
or guy to build their own sliding device. This gives you chance to
bring in entirely new companions, jump back to "our" collective home
(without figuring out, necessarily, how to "find" it for the current
sliders), and maybe even establish a new variation on the technology
tuned to the personality of the new slider.

The obvious criticism is that each new slider would thus feel like a
reboot, but it doesn't have to be a full reset (again, there is plenty
of room through subtle mentions of doppelgängers to connect with the
characters that have come before). But I don't think that an occasional
reboot/reset every now and then is a bad idea. Unlike *Doctor Who*, I
think the anthology nature of *Sliders* is generally better with less
mythological baggage.

It's an interesting paradox that American television tends to seemingly
loathe both deep continuity arcs and actual reset buttons. Some of that
is changing in modern television, but I like the idea of having the
ability to do some deep continuity across short arcs and yet have a big
reset button to push every couple of seasons to keep the audience and
the writers on their toes and interested in the long haul.

It's the Characters, Stupid
===========================

The best stories, and the best arcs, happen when they say interesting
things about the characters. It's easy to get lost (or forced) in the
"what cool things can we do" mindset, but when *Sliders* matters most,
the worlds visited reflect and refract the characters of its worlds.

*Sliders* should be an exploration of character development, exploring
the ways that traveling amongst one's own doppelgängers provides the
ability to learn more about one's self. *Sliders* works best when the
worlds travelled to are stepping stones in self-actualization and
discovery-- sliding as an externalized map of the characters, their
minds, and their relationships with each other.

Obviously there is a wellspring of epic tradition in this: The journey
is what matters, not the destination. "Home" is the destination, but...
you can't go home. Home is ultimately where you find it. However the
journey shapes you before you get there.

Certainly there is room in the journey for awesome one-offs, pit stops,
and side quests, but at the end of the season arc, it is the characters
that matter.

Cameos Matter
-------------

Beyond the Odysseus-like main characters and their journeys, *Sliders*
also has the power that it can provide awesome character moments almost
solely in recurring cameos. The doppelgängers that get re-encountered
will almost always provide interesting ways to explore how characters
change or remain the same against different backgrounds. Conrad Bennish
is the best example in actual *Sliders* episodes, and interestingly is
restricted to a sole arc in Season 1 (apparently by decree from above,
sigh).

I like that *Fringe* understands how important it can be to show, not
tell, a character across worlds. I think it can be done well outside of
the two-and-only-two worlds restriction, and I think that *Sliders* in
Season 1 shows some of that as well. (I like how *Fringe* is slowly
building a vocabulary that can be useful in discussing such things as a
*Sliders* reboot/revival.)

The Technology is Broken
========================

*Sliders* bounds back and forth between making the technology better and
worse. Overall, the technology is relatively inconsistent and could use
something of a reboot. One thing that I think is key, though, is that
the technology is *broken*. There can exist, off screen, sliders with
perfect tech, or at least better tech, but the *journey* is often more
interesting with subtly broken, quirky tech. The *journey* seems best
served when the next slide is unknown and the timer/countdown a source
of anxiety and maybe even hope.

A Basement-Full of Equipment
----------------------------

Something the show waffles on is the importance of the basement-full of
equipment plays on the technology. The early episodes imply that the
timer is merely a "return device". In Star Gate terms it might be a GDO
(Garage Door Opener) that signals a responsive basement elsewhere to
open up a new wormhole.
   
This would be a useful restriction, if it were indeed the case, as it
would establish the "neighborhood" of worlds to travel as the (still
potentially huge) subset of universes in which the basement lab exists
in a useable and powered state.  Unfortunately, even in the pilot this
possibly isn't the case.  Even if it was the case, it still doesn't
quite explain why different timings seemingly affect different
basements, particularly when the basements themselves seemingly have no
corresponding timer to synchronize.

Technology usage seems very inconsistent across even neighboring
episodes in the same season. If there is one key thing to reboot about
*Sliders* it would be about building a more consistent technology
framework.

On Possibly Rebooting the Tech
------------------------------

I do think that to reboot/reinvigorate *Sliders*, something needs to be
done about the tech. The important points, to me:

* There is a timer, it tells you when you must/should slide
* The timer is handheld, resembling a television remote and/or cellphone
* The timer may have some influence on slides (adjusting the timer,
  "power", etc...)
* There should be some sort of "penalty" for early/late slides

I think there are some potentially useful ideas that can be used or
combined to define a useful sliding tech. I think that if there remains
a basement-full of equipment, it effectively limits the "world radius"
that the sliders travel between. However, I like the idea that the
technology is compact enough that the timing device is indeed all that
is necessary for sliding (perhaps with a basement-full of theorems and
design systems used only for bootstrapping instead).

The original *Doorways*-inspired idea for the timer has something to do
with the idea that the wormholes are something of a natural phenomena
and that the timer is attempting to work out the time until the next
wormhole in the "right direction". Of course, I don't think the series
is ever really consistent on the matter.

One of the ideas that I like is that the timer could represent a
"charging time" (from background radiation or "localized quantum flux"
or some other sci-magic fuel source). I like the idea that taking a slide
early may be dangerous due to potential unstable wormhole (particularly
dangerous to the sliders themselves, possibly destabilizing during
transit), and the potential that the timer may take longer to charge
before the next slide. I like the idea that taking a late jump could be
dangerous due to potential unstable wormhole (particularly dangerous to
worlds connected by the wormhole, potentially destroying one or both).

The "charge" metaphor also makes it handy to explore, as things progress
in the journey of a slider, potential things like "charge grounding" to
reset the timer or "slide batteries" that can quickly or even
immediately charge the timer.

To be honest, I don't feel that such an approach would feel that
different from the existing (inconsistent) records of slider technology.

A War Amongst Sliders
=====================

One of the things that the later seasons toy with is the idea of a war
between groups of sliders. Certainly this is an "interesting" idea, but
I honestly think that it is often contrary to the best spirit of
*Sliders* (the "epic journey" ideal). A good war needs accurate tech,
and I'm of the opinion that broken/quirky tech is generally more
interesting to watch. (Just as I think the Pilot would have been much
less interesting if it focused on the more successful, somewhat more of
a jerk, Quinn Mallory doppelgänger, rather than the just so subtly
less successful protagonist we actually follow.)

I think the most useful place for any war amongst sliding groups is
off-screen, much as the recent *Doctor Who* revival treated its Time
War. It provides a great excuse why other sliders may so rarely be
encountered, because when their tech gets good enough they often end up
at war with each other. It could help to establish a reboot/revival as
being somehow in the same multiverse as the original by dropping a few,
basic hints of the (imho, silly) war that the last seasons worked to
establish, but never actually worrying about getting into any detail.

----

.. [1] Including its mention in Telltale's BTTF survey. I'd love to work
   on BTTF or JP, but if I can prove that I know way too much about
   Universal-owned IP maybe *Sliders* isn't a bad place to start. I do
   think *Sliders* might make a great episodic video game franchise...

.. vim: ai spell tw=72
