---
date: 2012-07-02 20:52:13.328422
db_id: 953
db_updated: 2012-07-02 20:59:19.177592
layout: post
tags: games
title: FandomFest 2012
---
Last weekend was FandomFest. As a convention it was somewhat
disappointing, but in terms of how I spent my time it was great fun.
FandomFest's heritage is as a horror film convention, and that still
dominates the convention. The gaming section was even physically
separated from the rest of the convention, having been ensconced in the
lobby-adjacent meeting rooms on the first floor.

To some degree, it felt as if I'd paid the entrance fee to a bigger
convention to attend a rather smaller one. Very little of the foot
traffic encountered the gaming section of the convention. (At times it
seemed as if gaming had more volunteers and staff then interested
players or even just curious bystanders.) The main conference floor and
concession vendors and cash bars, but such things were unavailable
directly on the first floor. [1]_ Main conference foot traffic and
queues made it not worthwhile, at least for me, to try to navigate
upstairs to such conveniences during a gaming break.

I think most telling to me, though, was that were Filmmaker and Author
badges that I saw, but no gaming equivalents: anyone with a badge in
gaming had one of the generic titles of Volunteer, Vendor and Staff. Not
a single Game Designer or similar title worn at the event. As far as I
know, there were no gaming-specific guests. [2]_ Given my knowledge of
the people involved in staffing the gaming part of the convention, I can
easily presuming such things were simple oversights.

That said, I can't complain too much. The conference was close enough to
home that I didn't mind braving the sauna weather to travel each morning
on foot. I played a couple of rounds of *Rock Band*, a game of Ascension
and several of its expansions, a game of `Man-Made Mythology`_ (you
should join the `Man-Made Mythology Kickstarter`_ before August 27), and
three games in three wildly different settings in the `Savage Worlds`_
system.

Having played a somewhat abbreviated game of Sean Patrick Fannon's
*Shaintar* setting at the dead dog for ConGlomeration, it was great to
have the chance to play a full session with him. I also finally got the
opportunity to try out Carinn Seabolt's *The Crew* setting after hearing
a bunch about it at ConGlomeration as well. (Carinn is also Sean's
wife, so I will make no public admittance of whom was the better GM
lest I cause domestic strife.)

Both of those games were part of a "Savage Saturday" and I got to know
some of the guys from Pinnacle Entertainment (the publishers and some of
the designers of the Savage Worlds system). Those that I had the
opportunity to play with were all great fun, and I hope that there will
be future chances to play alongside them.

`Man-Made Mythology`_ turned out to be a blast. [3]_ It's based on the Open
Gaming License system (the "D20 System" that backed D&D Third Edition
and continues to back *Pathfinder*) and attempts to somewhat shake up
the superhero RPG genre. Given Critical Strike is from Louisville, I'll
be keeping an ear to the ground for future opportunities to play and
play-test projects with them. Also, I'm still somewhat curious if I
might have interesting things I could contribute. I have a giant
collection of superhero origin stories and an interestingly strange
collection of related ideas and concepts that I feel would be fun to get
out and "exercise" a bit.

I'm also still wondering if maybe it is past time I started my own
setting or two to experiment. I probably should try to start a regular
Savage Worlds campaign and see if I can get any interest in that.

.. _Man-Made Mythology: http://www.criticalstrike.com/mmm/
.. _Man-Made Mythology Kickstarter: http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/597440348/man-made-mythology-a-comic-book-rpg
.. _Savage Worlds: http://www.peginc.com/

----

.. [1] Had I been in charge, I would have made sure that a *Rock Band*
       area clearly had reasonably direct access to alcohol. I'd
       probably also schedule a late night drunken tournament, too.

.. [2] There was a bit of scuttlebutt that someone should have at least
       invited Colin Ferguson down to the Ticket To Ride tournament
       given his winning adventure on Tabletop, but to my knowledge no
       such thing happened.

.. [3] The Man-Made Mythology session was with Carinn Seabolt and Sean Patrick Fannon as fellow players, and I felt like the group we had worked for the most part way too well. In some respects I felt the odd man out in terms of RPG experience contribution to the session.