---
layout: post
title: Recent Activity
---

Seems I fell into a blogging black hole for a few months. Mostly I've
been busy or I've mostly tweeted instead. So let's catch up on some
recent events.

Small Projects Completed
========================

[StingerCheck](http://stingercheck.azurewebsites.net) is a small web
application I delivered to my friend [Jordan
Wages](http://jordanwages.com) as something of a wedding present. It's
designed to answer the simple question: Does this movie have a stinger
at the end of its credits? If you listened to our (currently retired;
RIP) podcast you may have heard on it that Jordan hates sitting through
credits he doesn't have to, and I tend to sit through credits on
principle, so this is an app to kind of record that information.

[Macro Transaction Force Go!](http://worldmaker.net/macrotx/) is a small
"game" I completed for [Ruin Jam 2014](http://itch.io/jam/ruinjam2014).
It's a satire of a bunch of things, in a vaguely CYOA format.

[BattcherIntel](http://github.com/WorldMaker/BattcherIntel/) was a small
spy-themed game tracker I used to try to run a year-long quest game in
with family.  Release was rushed by a Holiday deadline and it ended up
with a few bugs at release. Reactions were interesting. It was an
interesting experiment.

Recent Events
=============

JoCoCruise 5 was amazing and I tried to capture [some of my experiences
of JoCoCruise 5](https://sway.com/5eTFjThHFwUJU6mZ), particularly
because I came home from the vacation to find out that I had been let go
from my previous employer (it wasn't personal, just business; *reduce
headcount for shareholder mirth*). I'm now in surprise job hunt, which
is a little stressful and wild. Working to figure out what the next
places my career will go might be.

Blog Migration
==============

I decided to "simplify" my website's footprint. For the last several
years I've used a custom [django](http://djangoproject.com) blog, which
while it afforded some custom things and a sandbox to play with some
toys, it was getting sadly stale and irritating to work with without
updating a bunch of things and cleaning up a bunch of other things.
Rather than update the custom blog application, I felt like it was time
to closer match my blog to my methodology of writing my blog (mostly
done in vim) and get some source control of my posts. Due to increasing
ubiquity (thanks to free hosting from the [hub of
gits](http://pages.github.com)), [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) was the
obvious choice for new blog platform.

I'm mostly excited with the move. I wanted to stick to a mostly
plugin-free blog, so I don't have all the archive pages I would have
preferred to have. That said, I did manage to migrate ALL of the links
that matter *and* a bunch that don't really matter (I migrated a bunch
of redirects that date back to the migration to the custom blog, way
back from the last time my blog was on *drupal*, shudder.)
