---
layout: post
title: Blurry Memories of a Silicon Valley That Might Never Have Existed, or The Purple Bay Area Haze
---

"What is your passion?" he asked me. "What is your passion, man?" He
couldn't emphasize enough how important it was to find one's passion and
how deeply he had conversed on such topics in conversations between
himself, Steve Jobs, Sonny Bono, and some unspoken amount of drugs.

I keep thinking about this event last week. I had had a few beers at my
[friendly neighborhood beer store](http://louisvillebeerstore.com/) and
watched the guy go from mumbling to himself to accosting me about
passion. Beer store bartenders and friends have been referring to the
guy by the name "Jimmy Page" and the impression I got from talking with
him was of those dream scenes in *Wayne's World 2* with "Jim Morrison".
All of us are stumped as to whether or not he's full of shit. He's
certainly seen more than his fair share of interesting drugs over his
years. For instance, the word *psilocybin* rolled off his tongue like
the name of an old lover.

Jimmy's back story, whether real or imagined, is that he has been a sound
engineer and sometimes DJ for the stars over the years. I was told he
had impressed some of the more musically nerdy amongst the beer store
family with working knowledge of rare albums and wild stories of
recording them. With a couple of us more technically inclined he
mentioned ties to old, odd threads of Louisville's ancient technical
history and new strange ties to exotic technology manufacturers today,
particularly the odd ties to Apple Computers.

The conversation that he interrupted was one largely about my current
job search and where I am looking and where I am trying to go. A part of
that conversation was my odd personal impressions of Silicon Valley
based on a couple of good interviews out there and one particularly bad
interview that still haunts me in a peculiar way. I had just about
finished with my tale of that bad interview to a beer store friend, and
fellow software engineer when Jimmy interrupted. It seemed important to
let him do so; it seemed to fit the rhythm of that conversation.

On the show *Silicon Valley*, which I loved as much as I had moments
where I couldn't decide whether to laugh or cry at how real it was,
Erlich Bachman claims that you cannot understand Silicon Valley without
making at least one trip to Burning Man (and presumably doing some
amount of drugs there). It's a sentiment I've heard from people in real
life too. For what it is worth, Jimmy claimed to have survived some 15
years of Burning Man and it was both one of the most probable things he
said and also one of the statements that most had me wondering that
maybe some pearl of wisdom might be surprisingly buried in the guy.

> What is your passion, man?

I've heard questions about my passions a bunch in the last few weeks.
It's an ingrained part of a lot of interviews. I continue to joke that
the role model of most technical interviews is [Tim the
Enchanter](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZJZK6rzjns) [^1] and of
course the first question must always be some version of "What is your
quest?"

What is my quest? What is my passion? Maybe it's because I've been
answering versions of this question for weeks at this point or maybe
it's something to do with the hazy memories of the Bay Area and the
pointed question from an otherwise hazy person spouting ghost stories of
a Silicon Valley that maybe never was, or most likely it was the two
beers and a few samples I had drank that night, but for this Jimmy Page
I produced the most succinct version I had yet answered to this
question:

"I just want to make people happy."

It looks trite on paper, and it sounded trite nearly as soon as I had
said it, but it also felt surprisingly *right*, in that moment, as my
simplest answer to that question. It does ring as a decent summary for a
half-dozen stories and a lot of the conversations I've been having. It's
also not far from connective tissue amongst my attempts at writing and
game development as well as my day job goals in software engineering.

It's such a simple and trite thing to say, but already in my experience
it has been surprisingly hard to accomplish. I have too many companies
on my resume that seemed to focus amazing amounts of energy into
increasing net *misery* amongst their own employees. I've worked on too
many internal applications and had a conversation in the form of:

"Who are the users of this application?"

"That team over there..."

"Should we ask them what they want out of the application?"

"Who cares?"

*I care*. It shouldn't be a *rebellious act* to prioritize the feature
and bug requests of an application's actual users. Corporate America is
miserable enough that I certainly hope that I never understand the
mentalities that lead to this. I hope that I can avoid ever again having
a boss telling me to do *less work* for the customer of an application I
am working on.

I'm not sure if there's an exchange rate where having one drunk
conversation with a man that seems to have been through fifteen years of
Burning Man equates to half a Burning Man experience, but I do feel I
owe some more respect to Silicon Valley than I've given it the past few
years. I've felt that Silicon Valley is too easily hypnotized by its own
technology and sometimes loses touch with reality, but I absolutely have
to admit that even my worst experiences with Silicon Valley the
companies all seemed to come from the right place and have good
intentions. They certainly know where their passion comes from. (Even if
maybe some of it is drugs. But who am I to judge?)

I still think there is probably some other deep lesson I missed in such
an odd conversation, but pondering if I've done enough towards my
passion and where that might take me next in my career is certainly a
start.

---

"Like you, Louisville is my hub," Jimmy answered to the question of what
he is doing in Louisville when he could still be in Cupertino, or
Holland where he is supposedly moving with his new fianc√©e. I certainly
get that concept. A portion of my stress in this job search is the clear
realization that to follow my passion it really is time to relocate
somewhere else for a while. It's always hard to move and it's looking
particularly hard staring at my finances and the emotional weight of
leaving my current home.

I don't know where I'm going to end up and it is stressful. But there's
hope embedded in that stress. Hope that maybe I will get a chance to
follow my passion to do something exciting.

[^1]:
    I've also got long rants about how much this irks me and how many
    problems I've got with the way technical interviews are and how deeply
    "important" they are to most software hiring cycles.

<!-- vim: set ai spell tw=72 ft=markdown enc=utf-8: -->
