---
layout: post
title: Vegan Chili
tags: [cooking]
---

I had been asked for the Vegan Chili recipe I used for my *Fifth Annual
Thunder Over Louisville Party*. I realized that my chili recipe at this
point is more of a thought process than an actual recipe and as I was
writing it I realized its a bit more of a ramble than, say, tweet-sized,
so now it is a blog post.

# Background

My chili recipe in general comes from years of making it with available
ingredients and tweaking it as I discover new options or find things of
interest to experiment with. I honestly don't think it is "much" of a
recipe, not just because it isn't written down, but also because it
started decades ago as just following the directions on store-bought
seasoning packets and at least in my head hasn't wandered too far from
that basic formula.

As the biggest brother in the family, I'd sometimes have to cook simple
things for lunch for my siblings and I. I cooked lots of things over
years, especially good old American staples like Kraft Mac & Cheese,
boiled hot dogs, Campbell's soup cans, etc. Probably the thing that was
closest to an actual recipe meal for many years for me was to cook a pot
of chili and a pot of spaghetti to serve the chili on.

# Ingredients

The ingredients list in my head is: Meat, Spices, Tomatoes, and Beans.
That's a pretty obvious deconstruction of the entire concept of chili
right there. It's also nice in that it is roughly the order you find
ingredients in a typical grocery store layout and also the order in
which I cook things; hurray for convenient mnemonics.

# "Meat"

This is the category I've probably experimented with the most over the
years and is also obviously the big key to change to make the recipe
vegan friendly. My vegan "meat" choice right now is the simple colorful
combination of all the bell pepper colors, a red onion, and mushrooms. I
tend to wander the produce section for interesting looking things.
Cooking for myself the stores these days tend to have pre-chopped bell
pepper medleys. I like getting a mixture of mushroom types and the basic
balance these days is about two-thirds "average" mushrooms and a third
portobello mushrooms. For chili, I don't feel like bothering with much
beyond produce and don't think you need any of the "meat substitutes".

I drizzle a thin layer of olive oil on the bottom of my pot, throw all
the meat ingredients in. Average mushrooms snap in interesting ways when
whole pieces are thrown into the pot and briefly prodded with your
spoon; portobello mushrooms I chop up. Bring it up to a small simmer.

# Spices

I still start with store-brand packet of chili seasoning. Strangely the
cheapest, most "value" store-brand packet has the least preservatives
and simplest ingredients in a good balance for a base flavor. It's lazy,
but it's a familiar base level and after all these years I'm comfortable
with it. This is also why I don't really consider my recipe all that
special beyond a simple one.

In addition to the chili packet, I tend to add other spices from my
spice cabinet in a general sort of improv based on what I'm feeling and
what I have in the spice cabinet. I'm a big fan of the [Bourbon Barrel
Smoked
Paprika](http://bourbonbarrelfoods.com/shop/bourbon-smoked-paprika/) and
add it to many foods, so it shouldn't be too surprising that I add a
dash to my chili. Other things include a dash of ground mustard, some
dried fire roasted tomatoes I have, more chili powder.

I dump the spices directly on the "meat", stirring and rubbing it all
over the produce. Let it all simmer together, the mushrooms to absorb
some of the spices and the onions to caramelize a bit. I tend to leave
the chili powder out and add a dash roughly every time I go to stir
the pot, more or less depending on how strong everything smells.

# Tomatoes

The must-have is a big can of diced tomatoes. I'm fascinated by the
growing number of types of "diced tomatoes &" options on the shelves
these days and improv my way to whichever ones sound interesting and are
available to purchase. Most commonly there's a diced tomatoes & green
chilies option and I will grab a can of that. For Thunder I felt like
adding to that also a can of diced tomatoes & cilantro with lime.

I add the tomatoes into the pot just as it feels like the onions are
caramelized enough and the rest of meat seems way too "dry".

# Beans

Bean shopping for me is also a bit of a can roulette based on mood and
interest. More so because the different textures of different beans also
helps keep the vegan chili interesting. My base here is Brooks chili
beans, typically two-thirds medium and one-third hot. Beyond that it
really is just about every bean I feel like adding; black beans, white
northern beans, pinto beans.

I throw the beans all in directly after the tomatoes. Then I mostly
leave everything on high until it boils, stirring every so often (and
adding an extra dash of chili powder as I feel it). Once it boils,
reduce heat back to medium or a simmer and give it a bit extra time for
good measure.

# Other

Louisville is a cultural border town between many food wars and
cultures, so I feel free to pick and choose as I see fit. "True Texas
style", I know would stop at the above (and still object to some of it,
I imagine). Of the more "Northern" accoutrements, my current feelings:

## In

### Pasta

An extra starch still seems like a good idea to make chili feel like a
complete meal. These days I prefer macaroni, but spaghetti is an old
friend here.

### Crackers

Crackers are useful for bonus salt management and extra crunch. I tend
towards oyster crackers, but won't say no to Frito's here.

## Out

### Dairy

Everyone loves dairy, but dairy just can't make the cut in vegan chili.
Still sometimes I want a good shredded cheese or sour cream, but I'm
trying to skip those these days.

### Sugar

I'm of the opinion these days that chili should not be sweetened.
