----
title: Angular is Rotten to the Core
tags: [tech]
----

I find Angular an impressive front-end framework for just how badly
it is designed, top to bottom, and yet how large of a cult-ish
following it has. There exists a weird "everyone knows it" mentality
that in practice seems to be entirely an illusion. There is the
strange "no one got fired for picking Google" echo of ancient IBM
mistakes exacerbated by Google barely dogfooding Angular (and arguably
never successfully). There is the awful internal politics of Google
that have produced many horror stories from former Angular developers,
former open source community contributors, and combinations in
between, and an impression that the rabbit hole goes only deeper if
you could dig beneath Google NDAs and secrecy.

Why does anyone use Angular in production?

I’ll start with the sociopolitical weirdness and save the real meaty
technical stuff for the end. Let’s think of it like one of those
long, mostly useless food blog narratives to air some grievances
before the technical equivalent of a recipe.

# "Everyone Knows It"

When we started a greenfield project at my employer (opinions here are
mostly mine and not that of my employer and other usual disclaimers
apply, of course) I suggested React, as I was comfortable and happy
with React in other projects, and even did some prototypes in early
testing in React. I was brought on to the project to be "the backend
expert", so I was overruled because "no one knows React" and "everyone
knew Angular". I didn't know Angular at the time, other than gut
instincts from skimming tutorials that it was "Enterprise" and
"Bloated" in all of the worst senses of both words, and some
hesitation/general "sense of doom" from reading the blogs of Rob
Eisenberg (because I had used Durandal successfully in previous lives
and Aurelia semi-successfully in more recent projects; I'll come back
to all of this later in this post).

As soon as we started digging into real world usage of the application
it became very apparent to me that everyone that claimed they "knew"
Angular, simply didn't. Out of frustration with application
performance and modularization needs and so many little problems, I
found myself increasingly having to become an expert on Angular, and
the more of an Angular expert I've become the angrier I've become for
using Angular at all.

I think there are two big lies that add up to an illusion that
"everyone" knows Angular: the Angular template language uses an `.html`
file extension, and Angular Dependency Injection at first glance looks
"Enterprise" and familiar to Java developers especially. (Sometimes C#
developers too.)

The first I think is the biggest illusion and the one that causes so
much trouble. React's JSX/TSX looks "weird" at first, and "no one
knows it" without at least some learning curve. Vue and Svelte aren't
liars either and people realize there is a learning curve to learn
their `.vue` and `.svelte` templates. Like the much mocked Jurassic
Park lines "it's a Unix system, I know this", despite the many
variations of Unix and the weird UI shown on the screens that wouldn't
have been familiar to anyone, "it's an HTML file, I know this" is an
amazing misdirection of Angular's. Angular's template language is no
less a complicated template system like `.vue` or `.svelte` or `.jsx`,
but that first impression from junior developers that they know enough
HTML it will be "easy" and they already know it is amazing (and
wrong).

Also, I realize that Angular themselves refuse to call it a "template
language" and go out of their way to call it a "view engine". They
seem to insist that you could ship the template language's HTML to a
browser (as Knockout used to do, using only HTML compatible custom
attributes, back in the day), but at the point where you have an AOT
compiler for it is the point where I think you have to admit it is a
custom language. At least in my opinion. Angular's insistence that it
is "just using HTML" seems so much intentional propaganda at this
point to keep the "everybody knows Angular" reputation despite an
incredibly complex template language compiler and build process.

# "No One Got Fired For Picking Google"

Google, for the most part, has never used Angular. The few projects
that have obviously used Angular are notoriously awful performing
applications.

The largest and most commonly noticed is the GCP cloud console.
Performance is definitely something it is not known for. Google and
its proponents will argue that the GCP console cross-cuts a huge
number of teams that all have to deliver components and maybe don’t
all individually have the right performance experts and collectively
don’t have the right incentives aligned to better coordinate
performance across teams and so a lot of the performance is left at
"out of the box" configured from base settings. (Despite GCP being
a huge revenue source for Google, a major competitive battle front
with AWS/Azure, and presumably time wasted spent configuring things in
GCP can be directly associated with time not running billable
operations.)

Angular proponents would point out how great it is that Google
doesn’t get "special privilege" and it’s almost a badge of
honor that one of the largest instances of Angular usage in the
company performs so poorly. This kind of "fairness" sounds great
on screen photons, but seems immediately and obviously flawed. Is it really
that great that everyone is equal in having bad performance out of the
box? If engineers "down the hall" and paid out of some of the same
budgets can’t get it to perform, who can?

One of the big lies implicit in the "no one went wrong going with
Google" thing here is that it implies that Angular works well at
Google scale, and yet here clearly it falls down. Regardless of what
Google thinks of itself, Google isn’t special: other companies have
multiple cross-cutting teams involved in building
websites/dashboards/consoles/portals all together. It isn’t some
special Google-only workflow, it’s a common problem, that Angular is
advertised to solve. (It’s one of the oldest reasons for
component-based systems since the invention of the computer.)

It’s possible that there is a use case that Angular was designed to
fit. (That’s somehow not using a component model built to be a
component model usable by multiple cross-cutting teams, despite
that’s why they have a component model.) But I’ve come to doubt
that given it doesn’t really seem like Angular was designed for
specific workflows and instead it was designed to meet the goals of
specific egos.

# A Toxic Workplace?

Here especially I can only make second and third hand speculations.
Please take all of this with a grain of salt, try to find your own
primary sources, and realize that even primary sources that are
publicly posted to blogs such as Medium are filtered a degree or two
sometimes away due to Angular’s relationship with Google NDAs and
other secrecy tools.

The reports are that Angular is among the many projects at Google that
appears to be following Ego-Driven Development. (Google is also not
special here and certainly plenty of companies practice Ego-Driven
Development, but Google has picked up something of a particular
reputation for it in the way that it infects their promotion culture
and odd incentives to create products that duplicate existing ones at
the company and disincentives to support and maintain existing ones.)
Angular tries to be an open source community-supported project (in
addition to getting the marketing weight from Google behind it), so
some of this dirty laundry has aired very publicly. (Compared to what
we can mostly only speculate about, say, Google's revolving door of
chat apps.)

Most of what I followed second hand was the saga of Rob Eisenberg. I
had been following Rob because of Durandal. I loved Durandal for a few
years. It was a great minimalist SPA framework that left the hard
template/dataflow work to Knockout and then just filled in the SPA
gaps (routing, component lifecycle). On the back of Durandal Rob was
invited to work on Angular (in the awkward Angular.JS to Angular
transition years). There was some sort of falling out some time into
that effort, presumably for creative differences, and at the end of
that Rob created Aurelia as an answer to Angular's goals.

(I used Aurelia for a project before Angular. I didn't like it
anywhere like I liked Durandal and kind of disliked it. Though in
context of having now worked with Angular I can see better where it
came from and some of how it wound up departing from Durandal's
principles. I don't expect to want to use Aurelia again on a project,
but I'd definitely recommend it to any "Angular shop" that wants a
lighter weight alternative that "everyone knows" and possibly has more
of a pit of success than Angular. Faint praise, of course, but still
praise.)

I offer this (possibly?) slander mostly as an appetizer to the
technical discussion. It's not entirely unrelated, as I find it
interesting background. It answers to at least sate some of my curiosity how
Angular got designed the way it was and who it was maybe designed for.
(Ego being an obvious and clear answer to both.)

# No One Knows Angular (But I Know More Now, Sorry)

My fast ramp up to team "expert" on Angular came from a path that was
rare and while I would never assert that it makes me a better "expert"
than most on Angular, it certainly makes me a peculiar one, especially
in being able to pinpoint to some key things were Angular has created
"pits of failure" (where it's just too easy for developers following
"best practices" and tutorials and trying to do things "the Angular
way" find themselves failing through no fault of their own).

One of my odd paths is use of Aurelia *before* Angular. Aurelia has a
better Dependency Injection system than Angular. (In part by going all
in on Typescript's experimental decorators support rather than
half-in. Though I think both are wrong to use an **experimental** flag in
Typescript based on a TC39 proposal that has been rejected one and a
half times.) In particular, Aurelia tree-shakes better out of the box and
without a lot of config work. Aurelia's CLI is better at finding circular
dependency mistakes and things that may not tree-shake well (and
suggesting fixes when noticed). A lot of Angular's easiest to fix
performance problems stem directly from the overly complicated and not
very good "Modules" system that gets in the way of all of the smarts
and advances packer tools have put into ES2015 module support and
ES2015 module treeshaking. The "Modules" provide a second parallel
import system that is harder to tree-shake, easily gets out of sync,
and actively gets in the way to getting bundle sizes down.

The other somewhat peculiar path was that I've been a Reactive
Extensions fan for a long time. I've done C# UI apps with Reactive
Extensions from when ReactiveX was still fresh out of Labs/Preview
kindergarten. In C# I use ReactiveX (and more recently
IAsyncEnumerable InteractiveX) as extremely useful tools in
complicated (but easily described by ReactiveX) backend dataflows and
multi-threading and plumbing. I used Cycle.JS, a JS UI framework built
for first class ReactiveX, for years before running off to React for
the larger ecosystem. Even in React I tend to keep redux-observable as a
tool in my arsenal for complicated data flow. I've even built some
interesting [Discord bot logic "backends" in redux-observable]({% post_url 2019-10-08-redux-observable %}). I know
ReactiveX and RxJS pretty well at this point, their strengths and
weaknesses, the differences between hot and cold observables and when
you want each to apply to which problem, when and where to apply
ReactiveX/RxJS as great tools (and how best to do in places that don't
phase junior developers too much), and some good ideas where
ReactiveX/RxJS isn't the best tool for the job.

If there's a core decision in the core library of Angular that is most
emblematic a pit of failure it's the incredibly half-assed
adoption of RxJS. This one decision, this one broken usage, affects
everything else, contributes to so much of the performance churn of
people's apps by default **especially** when they believe they are
following best practices. Angular intentionally ignores RxJS best
practices in setting its own "best practices". Angular decided that
they wanted to mix all of the concerns of RxJS Observables,
BehaviorSubjects, and classic Node-era Event Emitters in one core
EventEmitter class that is the *worst of all worlds*. This adds an RxJS
dependency that bloats **every** Angular app everywhere no matter how
well the developers know RxJS. RxJS is a huge dependency to do that
with. RxJS has gotten better at tree-shaking itself, but it is still a
huge chunky library.

RxJS is hard to learn. It does have a huge learning curve. It’s not
just something "everyone knows". If there is a bigger bright neon
sign that should be blaring on top of all the assumptions and
assertions that "everyone knows Angular" it should be "No one
knows RxJS". You can understand why Angular developers might want to
provide "escape hatches" from RxJS because they want make the
framework more approachable. However, by ignoring RxJS best practices
and making the EventEmitter publicly a BehaviorSubject in API, Angular
gives developers an escape hatch deep inside in the core for ignoring
RxJS best practices (BehaviorSubjects are meant to be generally
avoided, but when used as internal details of an encapsulated API),
an excuse to avoid learning RxJS until it is far too late, and
almost always immediately falling into a pit of failure
that results in bad performance and the many of the worst of singleton "god
objects" that are just nasty global variables with much more complicated
APIs. Right out of the starting gate, Angular "best practices" cause
so much of their own misery.

It’s a worst of both worlds situation: why take on a huge,
complicated dependency like RxJS if you are just going to immediately
provide system breaking escape hatches? These escape hatches then
breed like rabbits, having a ripple effect on the entire ecosystem.
The few libraries that are more likely to use RxJS for complex
behaviors are more likely to get it wrong simply by following the bad
example directly from right inside Angular’s core and leaking BehaviorSubjects
everywhere. The ones that don’t
want to use RxJS just sit on complex webs of escape hatches and
easily broken state mechanics (especially if they fall into
just using global singletons everywhere). So many tutorials and examples of
"good code" are littered with bad RxJS usage (BehaviorSubjects
leaking across encapsulation boundaries, Observable subscriptions
without matching unsubscriptions (classic malloc without free;
reference counting is hard and everyone is bad at it and will be for all time), cold/hot
problems, over-subscriptions, and more even more complicated RxJS data
flow problems (that at best are just too much work and at worst are
memory leaks and performance problems waiting to happen).

The ripple effect happens inside the Angular house too as other
Angular components can’t make up their minds to embrace RxJS or not,
can’t make up their mind how many of their own escape hatches they
need to add, and just constantly adding to the escape hatch proliferation
problem.

Angular Routing tries to use RxJS deeply and while it doesn’t let
BehaviorSubjects directly escape into its public API it offers an
almost equally bad “snapshot” escape hatch.

Angular’s HttpClient embraces RxJS deeply in its outputs, but for
what are essentially over-weight Promises. It doesn’t take
Observables for input, nor does it use them in the middle of its
processing pipeline, and in being used for not much more than
over-complicated Promises it still has ripples like the other escape
hatches. Some developers start to associate Observables as "bad
Promises that you can’t use async/await with" and take away from
it that `subscribe` is just like Promise `then` and use it like bad
pre-async/await era callback hell. It directly contributes to the
subscribe without unsubscribe problem in so many tutorials and sample
code. There actually is an easy solution that these tutorials/samples
could use: RxJS Observables provide a good `toPromise()` implementation
that does the subscribe and immediately unsubscribe after first value
dance, and lets you use traditional async/await. (I've made this
suggestion to at least a couple of tutorial authors I've found. But
there's no way I alone can post that suggestion to the expansive number of
bad tutorials in the Angular ecosystem.)

Of course, Angular’s HttpClient could just return Promises if that
is 99% of what people use them for and most uses of HttpClient are
single value expectations. HttpClient offers a somewhat plausible reason for this: with
an optional config parameter HttpClient will provide Observables with
more values that include a stream of progress values. In theory, this
might be useful for better progress reporting in the app, but in
practice I’ve still yet to see a good library take good advantage of
it. HttpClient isn’t in a library that is setup (in current Angular
"organization" structures) to offer an out-of-the-box UI component to
make use of it. It's a feature that might as well not exist given very
little good guidance on how to use it (and again that I've never seen
anyone really take advantage of it). Even in trying to add progress
reporting to projects I'm working on, it was much easier to build a
dependency-injected HttpInterceptor that kicks off and stops NProgress
(and isn't far removed from things I've done all the way back to
Durandal and its middleware). HttpInterceptors are "middleware" and at least they aren't
intentionally built to be RxJS escape hatches, but here it is the one
escape hatch I found myself particularly using from a provided Observable,
because it was so much simpler.

Angular's Template Language doesn't bother with first-class support
for Observables (though that would potentially make things a lot
cleaner; Knockout called its bindings Observables for a reason, way
back in the day). Instead the template language relegates it to
AsyncPipe, which I was angry when I found it in its almost hidden spot
in Angular's documentation which also relegates it to something of an
afterthought. The other obvious thing that would clean up a lot of
tutorials/samples (including and especially here in Angular's own
documentation!) with regard to Observables is if far more
tutorials/samples used `| async` pipes instead of manual Observable
subscribe/unsubscribe in example components. (Or you know, if Angular
had added Observable support first class into the template language
instead of as an afterthought.) Again,
RxJS best practices heavily suggest reducing the number of
subscribe/unsubscribe to a bare minimum, and yet almost every example
in Angular's documentation (and from there so much of the rest of the
ecosystem) use manual subscribe/unsubscribe rather than something like
AsyncPipe that can handle it automatically. Though I realize that
doing that would mean more Angular documentation would need
to teach RxJS sharing (`shareReplay(1)` being one of the most common
in my arsenal) and that would risk needing to teach the hot/cold
Observable problem and directly risk that "everybody knows Angular" reputation
for the actual learning curve (that's still there anyway, just hidden
behind bad documentation and bad practices as "best practices",
because apparently Angular is okay with bad performance out of the
box).

At this point I've contributed more than I should have had to to fix
RxJS-related documentation mistakes to the wider Angular ecosystem.
I've left notes to tutorial writers how they might better their
tutorials (though there is no incentive to do so, because "everybody
knows Angular"). I've glanced at the bad Observable code in entire
libraries, shuddered in horror, and wrote my own in a third of the
code (and been thankful for the production performance problems I
avoided). Two of the worst offenders I've seen are Angular Material
and Angular CDK, and if Google can't get Observables right in its own
"second party" libraries, I don't blame anyone else in the ecosystem
but the Angular core team for these problems. Also, tossing Angular
Material and Angular CDK out the airlock was a huge "performance
fixing" development effort on my part (after what the frontend devs
defaulted to), and keeping them out is a larger effort because so many
tutorials and other third party components "suggest" them ("no one got
fired for picking Google").

# Suggestions For a Better Angular ("Project Gawky")

So I'm not a monster, and this is a "recipe" blog like I said, so I'm happy
to leave with a thought experiment of what something like Angular
would look like if it properly embraced Observables instead of being
wishy-washy with them all the way deep into the core. I think
Observables are a great idea for a frontend framework (again, I used
Cycle.JS for some time previously). Let's call this thought experiment
"Project Gawky" (as a fun synonym for "angular" when referring to a
person that also implies a double meaning of observing).

At one point I toyed with the idea of attempting a toy proof of
concept for "Project Gawky", but so far as I know Angular's "Ivy
compiler" for its template language is not documented at all for reuse
and I have no interest in building my own template language and
especially not in trying to emulate the Angular template language just
for a toy proof of concept.

Taking for assumption that the resemblance to HTML of Angular's
template language is a part of its success and something worth
keeping, I'd start from what you can do if the only bindings you can
do are Observables. The idea is basically RxJS-powered "modern" Knockout.

First, it would get rid of the incredible weirdness that is Angular's
two-way binding syntax (the strange bag-in-box `[(thing)]` that a lot
of people don't like or understand in Angular templates). Supporting
which is an incredibly odd "code behind" pattern involving a normal
property and an `EventEmitter` for when it changes, but only by the
component itself because you want to avoid infinite loops by it
accidentally re-emitting values it got from other components/Angular.

But that's a nice to have "side effect", the real meat is what you can
do once every output variable in the template is expressed as an
Observable: combination and scheduling. For years now, React has been
building a bunch of initiatives in somewhat parallel (Suspense,
Concurrent, etc) to do a lot of complicated update combination and
scheduling: in a nutshell, they want low priority DOM updates to happen
during the browser's `requestAnimationFrame` timer, high priority
updates (such as to inputs that the user is directly interacting with)
to happen as soon as possible, and they want to be able to combine all
of the updates to entire component sub-trees at once rather than
showing partial updates as data is loaded. These initiatives have been
fascinating to watch, especially as some of the information React is
doing for this combination and scheduling work is "reverse-engineered"
from the "pull" and "diff/patch" nature of the Virtual DOM. React has
been doing some interesting smart things to gather more information,
and the underpinnings of Hooks are fascinating in relationship to
these efforts. (Though Hooks are required for some of it to work, they
mostly just light up more "smarts" and even class-based components
still sometimes benefit.)

An Observable based template engine potentially has a much easier time
doing such complicated combination and scheduling with the comparative
"push" nature of Observables. So easy and cheap it's nearly free and
out of the box. Combinators like `combineLatest` are the bread and
butter operators for why you'd pick something like Observables in the
first place. Observables have a direct concept of Schedulers which
provide timing mechanics and moving some updates to happen at
`requestAnimationFrame` may be as simple as adding `throttleTime(0,
requestAnimationFrameScheduler)` to the right pipelines. Given an AOT
compiler (like Ivy) you could sometimes bake entire,
complicated Observable pipelines for entire component trees at build
time (including smart uses of combinators and schedulers) with little
to no runtime
code. In *theory* it is so much of what React has been trying to do
with a lot of (successful and interesting) hard work in potentially a
simpler and "cheaper" package deal.

Observables-first "Project Gawky" should reduce a lot of things that
Angular relies on Dependency Injection for, or the very least reduce a
lot of singletons acting as global state in the average project, so I
could even see trying to use Dependency Injection still for wiring up
some of the more complicated pipelines. DI in that case might be a
good way to better encapsulate BehaviorSubjects and remove their need
from all "user" code. BehaviorSubjects are mostly an escape hatch
around essentially circular dependencies and while DI sometimes hates
circular dependencies, in the case of Observables they make a certain
sense. (Cycle.JS' name is not an accident.)

(To contrast with Cycle.JS for the very few developers curious:
Cycle.JS' Virtual DOM approach has a very "Observables first"
definition. Inverting it to be HTML Template "first" like an
RxJS-based Knockout should feel very different from the approach of
Cycle.JS. "Smart templates" doing some pipeline management such as
`requestAnimationFrameScheduler` is something mostly sort out of scope
for Cycle.JS, leaving that essentially for the "drivers"/Virtual DOM
to reverse engineer similar to React, though you can do some such
things by hand to give it a push. I'm not a fan of Angular's
Dependency Injection system, and while I'd simplify it, I can see a
use for a Dependency Injection system in an Observable-first "Project
Gawky" to clean up or at least simplify some of the harder bits of
wiring/plumbing I recall from Cycle.JS.)

All it would take is taking Observables seriously and first class with
fewer escape hatches. It would be a lot harder to learn, but might
have a much greater pit of success (smarter update combination and
scheduling, right there out of the box with little to no developer
config or wiring needed), and presumably a smaller pit of failure. I
ran out of interest in trying to build a toy "Project Gawky" proof of
concept when I didn't see an easy way to hack the Angular template
language compilers for such an experiment, but I'll happily code
review and maybe pitch in if someone else wants to toy with the idea.
