---
title: In Space the Moon is Always Full
tags: fiction
---

We were mostly sure that the former nazi rocket engineers we hired
for this most covert project were vampires even before we hired them.
We wanted vampires. Vampires that could be corrupted to the American
Dream. We needed vampires. Vampires would help us win the space race.
Vampires would help us defeat the werewolves.

If you’ve heard of me by now, I’m a boring white guy in a handful
of old Nasa files. My name at the time was bland and unassuming and
you’d be in good company if you couldn’t recall any detail of my
face even staring directly at it. It was a useful disguise for some time
for a naiad go between of Nasa, three dozen three letter acronym
agencies, and the secretive cold war project that defended the world
from a deadly werewolf  agenda but nearly destroyed the Moon in the
process.

Everything is still classified, I write this memoir in the hopes that
it won’t be believed. The world doesn’t need to know how close we
came to blowing up the moon. An old woman claiming to be a
silver-diseased naiad claiming to have been a boring middle manager
white guy in mid-20th century Nasa telling this tale should do plenty
to keep it firmly in the annals of Cold War conspiracy nuttery. I hope.

Having said that, allow me to ground this tale in some of the science
of the so called super-natural. (Not to accidentally add credence to
this tale, but because I am and have always been a scientist and these
sort of technical details matter to me.) For instance, take the
aforementioned silver, common to many werewolf stories and related to
my current unfortunate allocation of human-perceived old age. I’m
not talking about normal silver, what a boring shiny metal that is,
but old language habits die hard and I of course mean quicksilver. The
element that today’s periodic tables more imaginatively call
"Mercury".

Now Mercury poisoning will kill just about anything on the planet
slowly. (Myself being an immediate case in point.) It’s reputation
to kill Werewolves instantly is maybe a bit exaggerated, but it is
indeed one of the things most effective to killing them. Their beefed
up human-wolf hybrid metabolisms being extremely sensitive to Mercury.
Or quicksilver and 'silver as you’d still call it if you are a few
millennia old such as myself and some of my vampirical former
colleagues. Just again don’t confuse it with the silver of
silverware. Throwing a couple forks at a werewolf will just make
them mad.

There are plenty of scientific and semi-scientific deconstructions of
what sort of blood-borne parasites a vampire might be in popular
culture. You can extrapolate well enough from many of them to
something resembling the truth. I'd rather not get into specific
details as vampires are disgusting and I'd like to keep my lunch down
while I write this. Vampires are blood sucking parasites in every way,
including and especially personality. They are awful people and I
never would have worked with them by choice, but for the circumstances
and the limited availability in help. I had a planet to protect and
they were the devils I knew. I don't assume people will entirely agree
with this coalition of the necessary evil, and I have regrets to this
day with the company I had kept, but I can only hope the outcomes were
worth it. One thing I will offer scientifically speaking is that I do
like to correct the impression that vampires were more of an Eastern
European native parasite. While they became known for some incredibly
violent outliers in Eastern Europe, rest "assured" (and it is not a
reassuring fact) that their more successful warrens were more often in
western Europe. You just don't have as many horror stories making it
into pop culture from western Europe, not because they didn't happen
but because they were better at hiding their parasitic insanity out
of public view. I did mention that these particular vampires were
former nazis, who had played their own nasty parts in events over there.
We tried to recruit them to the American Dream as if dreams of boring
suburban life could control the urges to feast on the blood of
innocent Americans. We let their usefulness cloud the acts of
monstrosity they had done relatively recently during the war, much
less over the course of quite long lives.

I can guess you have a ton of scientific complaints about the
plausibility of the existence of naiads, and I could get into a lot of
them if you had weeks for a proper symposium on the subject. As a
scientist trained and working in Western (so called "modern")
traditions for several centuries, I unfortunately default to the greek
name.  As something of a native to the Americas I should point out
that there are plenty of more applicable first nations names and
nicknames to choose from. To some extent it doesn't matter to this
tale, my role was a bureaucrat leading the charge and ego checking
some vampires. Naiad is such an interesting old word conjuring images
of young maidens in water, the spirits and protectors of that water.
Somewhere between helpful, immortal demigods and bitchy monsters you
don't want piss off. I'd love to claim that I embodied all of that in
my life in different capacities. In the capacity relevant to this
tale, I was a boring white man in a suit and tie working for
government bureaucracy, about the exact opposite in every way of what
you would expect of someone labeled a "naiad", so the science of my
life is perhaps not entirely relevant here. The symposium will have to
wait.

So in the late 1950s Uncle Sam had discovered that there was a
surprising amount of influence by werewolves in the highest levels of
Soviet space efforts. By Uncle Sam I don't just mean the
anthropomorphism of the usually more faceless American bureaucracy,
but in this case a specific informant usually referred to by that
moniker. I'm told they were a balding harpy sometimes nicknamed by
their home bureau as "America's favorite bald eagle", but I've never
met them so I don't know how true that description is rather than
merely a cover and/or a joke. (As a naiad from a bureau trying to
control vampires, it would not have surprised me if America had a
harpy intelligence asset with a taste for jingoistic cosplay on the
payroll as well.) Uncle Sam's smuggled plans and gathered intel
suggested that the Soviet werewolves were extremely keen on control of
the moon.

In fear of Soviet werewolves controlling the moon, several agents
including myself were tasked with different initiatives to keep our
moon out of Soviet hands and especially those with Soviet werewolf
claws. I had been at the Bureau of Land Management under a prototype
of the modern day EPA. That was good proper science you would expect a
naiad to be involved with. On paper, given my classification level,
and my science background, my cushy place embedded in Nasa's
hierarchy, my role was the head scientist for all the initiatives and
one of the most central figures. In practice I felt a lot more like
chief vampire wrangler on the project. For the most part the vampires
were already working for Nasa. Nasa hired a lot of former nazis to be
rocket scientists and unsurprisingly the sets of former nazi rocket
scientists head hunted by the US and former nazi rocket scientists who
were also vampires were very nearly isomorphic. (That is there were
only a few outliers outside the main union section of the Venn Diagram
of the two sets.)

The vampire/werewolf rivalry goes back centuries. I don’t have a lot
of details on it and it isn’t my place to explain it to anyone else even if I did, as an
outsider to the rivalry. The important things to the bureaus I was
placed in the middle of was that vampires had their own reasons to
stop dangerous werewolf activities (no matter their views on Soviet
geopolitics, the Cold War, and/or communism), and that they already
met a certain "security clearance level" for cryptid and monster
related operations. (My cryptid work for the Bureau of Land Management
and its early days EPA predecessor obviously putting me directly on
the radar as the safe leader/babysitter role in the project.)

The basis of the project was that the US government realized that
where it had recruited primarily former nazi rocket scientists who
were vampires, the Soviet union focused on the former nazi rocket
scientists who were werewolves. The US felt it needed to: 1) establish
what the scientific relationship existed between werewolves and the
full moon happened to be, 2) prevent werewolves from gaining
territorial control of the moon, and 3) provide for the ongoing
defense of the moon and related space territories as may be useful to
werewolves.

It was the first point that most interested me in the project. It
sounded like a fascinating scientific study. Unfortunately, the first
issue turned out to be a lot less of a standard scientific inquiry and
a lot more of a covert intelligence task assigned to other bureaus.

Werewolves are not native to the Americas. The vampire-focused head
hunting had resulted in fewer werewolves known to the US government,
and of those very few outliers, most were just busy enough with existing
Nasa projects, were considered risks to read in to the project by
their vampire colleagues, and through forethought had non-consent to
blind scientific testing clauses in their immigration forms filed with
the State Department. Meanwhile, the first nations are familiar with
several cryptids native to the Americas with resemblance to
werewolves. However none of them seem to have direct relationships to
the werewolves known to (European) pop culture with especially the
presumed lunar cycle link we were concerned with. With essentially no
subjects to directly inquire into their behavior or examine their
behavior in controlled circumstances, it was unfortunately for my
interests in science of the project, data gathering was left to library research and trying to
smuggle Soviet science data across the Cold War fences and walls.

That left me to babysitting parts 2 and 3. Under the assumption that
in space the moon was always full, the vampire rocket scientists
started with the assumption that the moon was a dangerous resource to
leave available to werewolves in space and their Plan A right from the
immediate start was to do a controlled demolition of the entire moon
as a denial tactic. Sure it would destabilize Earth's tides for a few
centuries and make the night generally darker, but those were seen in
some ways as side benefits to vampires. This "Plan A" in particular
was where I most felt like I was in constant pressure to babysit the
vampires. I cannot tell you how much energy I wasted over the years of
involvement in that project in conversations such as:

Them: "Why don't we just blow up the moon? That would solve all of our
problems."

Me: "We can't just blow up the moon."

Them: "Why not? What has the moon ever done for us?"

Me: "A lot of people would miss the moon."

Them: "Yes, and many of those people are werewolves. Why should
familiarity with a lunar status quo stop us?"

Me: "We can't just blow up the moon. It would devastate Earth's
environment for centuries."

Them: "That sounds like a you problem to me, vampires and most humans
would survive. Mostly well enough."

Me: "We can't just blow up the moon. You need to find a better Plan A.
This has to be Plan Z or lower."

Around and around again in circles. I know they equally wasted lots of
planning time devising all the various means to attempt a controlled
demolition of the moon using back of the envelope estimates of
projected Nasa rocket capabilities. They debated endlessly if
deorbiting the moon alone might be sufficient and roughly the tonnage
of rocket fuels or nuclear fissile materials might be needed to do
either job with minimal risks to Earth (and/or appropriate redundancy
in case of error).

Everyone knows the Apollo program was the first to land a man on the
moon, but few today remember that before that the Soviets successfully
orbited someone around the moon, and obviously that test
pilot was a werewolf. Our pressure to get beyond planning to action
became even more crushing. Everyone wanted to know all the details of
what the soviets had discovered in that test flight. Was the
assumption correct that in space the moon was always full? Were there
complications from the dark side of the moon? We in turn pressured our
covert operations to get as much intel as possible out of the reds,
and were disturbed to find the only reliable data coming back was that
whatever the results of the test flight, the Soviet Union was even
more determined to build a Lunar Base.

The uphill battle against "Plan A" became almost impossible.
Things started derailing into serious details in how to equip an
upcoming Apollo flight to demolish the moon and what sort of cover
stories to use. (Overheard at one point: "What if we claim the moon
really was made of cheese and we accidentally melted it? The American
public might buy into the lie if we give them a fun excuse to plan
neato moon fondue parties. But there’s at least one industrial dairy
supplier that would love a contract to supply cheese Nasa could sell
as 'real moon cheese for fondue' for a few quick bucks to the Nasa
operating budget. Might need it too because would Congress trust a
Nasa that accidentally melted the moon?")

I worked extra hard on pushing vampire resources towards what I
considered the most viable "Plan 1" (in this sort of bureaucracy 1
is higher than A, and that’s what I needed; I really couldn’t have
everyone thinking blowing up the moon was the highest priority plan).
That plan was simple and stupid using what science we did know: that
werewolves had a deadly allergy to quicksilver. It was easy enough to
"borrow" the bombardment approaches some of the Plan A colleagues
were working on to plan a simple contamination of the moon’s surface
with as much Mercury as we could get our hands on in as much time and
space as each Apollo flight plan would allow. No need for much of a
cover story than leaky equipment and the usual "humans are bad about
messing up the environments around them".

We had no idea if the extra Mercury content added to the moon would
impact werewolves by much other than hopefully delaying lunar base
plans until at least after expensive toxic metal surveying and/or
remediation efforts.

With fewer guarantees in the plan and a lot of known unkowns Plan 1
certainly had a much tougher time with executive scrutiny than Plan A.
It was a down to the wire decision just before finalized Apollo flight
plans that left me a nervous wreck. I did everything I could to defend
Plan 1.

Not that I wanted to coat Earth’s old satellite friend with toxic
metals either, but if a plan was to be put into action I could not
understand why there was any debate left that we should *not* just blow up
the moon.  I can only assume a lot of them presumed (with no more
evidence than we had for Plan 1, but a lot more pop culture "gut
instinct") that we could be done with the threat of werewolves
forever if we just blew up the moon.

At the end of some nail biting last meetings at the White House,
having gone all the way up the chain of command to the final US executive
for a decision, Plan 1 was the contest winner.

The seeding of large amounts of Mercury on the moon was a success,
including as a delaying tactic. The plans to build a Soviet Lunar Base
were delayed past the fall of the Soviet Union itself. So far as we
are aware today the threat of werewolf control of space is greatly
diminished without a moon base to call home. (We continue to hope.)

I still wish Russia would open up some of the Soviet werewolf science.
I’d love to know if the moon really is always full in space. I
suppose I won’t live long enough to know now, and I will regret
never having access to the science.

I appreciate the irony that after advocating for a plan to bombard the
moon with quicksilver I have been struck down to old age from too much
quicksilver contamination in the country’s water. I feel like that
was a personal failure given my time in the BLM and the EPA. In my
darker hours sometimes I wonder if it was a conspiracy to murder the
rest of the world’s cryptids, only to face the huge costs to human
lives and the rest of the planet’s ecosystems and the consequent
Occam’s Razor reminder that American companies have generally always
been short-sided, greedy, environment destroying immortal monsters
that make us cryptids look far more benign in comparison.
