---
title: "Fast 9: The Fast & Furious Saga"
tags: [films]
---

A few years back I did a marathon session of the first 7
*Fast & Furious* movies, and in the process of that after re-watching the
first three films (the only three in that marathon I had seen prior to
that marathon) I [had a lot of words especially on the third film
*Tokyo Drift* and especially where it most diverged from what I judged
to be the three act structure of the first two movies]({% post_url 2015-08-31-fast-furious %}).
I called it too many words on the _Fast & Furious_ franchise at the time (in general),
but especially about _Tokyo Drift_, and here we are six years later
and I'm going to give an even longer treatise drifting on, about, and
around _Tokyo Drift._

The basic _Fast & Furious_ three act structure I described as
RACE!, Car Build/Character Build, and then Heist. Some might argue
that the later movies don't follow the "formula" as much as the first
two films that I built the structure around, though for the most part
I think they do, especially if you see it mostly as a push in the
slider from the "Car Build" into deeper "Character Build" territory.
(When you have access to just about any sort of car that you want,
including somehow plausibly [in universe] tanks and armored carriers,
it's maybe not a surprise the emphasis on rugged DIY mechanic work
mostly vanishes.)

My biggest conclusion about _Tokyo Drift_ was that while the movie
feels like it contains the first two acts in this "structure" (it's
got the RACE! and involves a ton of Car Build/Character Build) it is
clearly and obviously missing the Heist. _Fast & Furious_ 4-6 do a
great job of "earning" the death of Han and making it an epic part of
the saga. But the one thing they never quite did was deliver that
missing Heist act, at least in my estimation. There was to me a
lingering sense of unfinished story that somehow at least the
Character Build (if not directly the Car Build) work from
_Tokyo Drift_ had to come back to matter in a franchise proper Heist. That
maybe there should be a reason for Han to level up a bunch of drifting
skills in Tokyo. That at the very least, the film's protagonist (Sean)
should serve in a critical role in a Heist, if not the Family. (There
was a cameo in 7, to carry the baton directly across the timeline
jumps, which felt necessary, but insufficient to me to alleviating
that feeling.)

With that loaded setup out of the way, before getting to _Fast 9_ (and
plenty of spoilers about it) and in the spirit of *Tokyo Drift*'s place
in the chronology I want to make a quick sharp detour to do a
different sort of setup. In the lead up to _Fast 9_'s much delayed
release my hype led me down a small rabbit hole and I bought and
watched Justin Lin's 2002 solo directorial debut
_Better Luck Tomorrow_. _Better Luck Tomorrow_ is a quirky "students fall into
crime" drama that is today recognized in interviews as the official,
unofficial origin story of Han in the _Fast & Furious_ saga. At the
time of _Tokyo Drift_ it was presumably Justin Lin just borrowing
characters and actors from his earlier work to make things easier on
himself in writing/directing a big capital-F Franchise. It's an
interestingly relevant movie to the franchise, and fits surprisingly
well into the continuity. It also fits that weird slope from "humble
crime origins" (stealing DVD players in the case of Dom in the first
_The Fast & The Furious_) to "international car-based superheroes".

Drifting further to tangent, Han is the only character that carries
over from _Better Luck Tomorrow_, but not the only actor as Jason
Tobin played Han's cousin Virgil in _Better Luck Tomorrow_ and Tokyo
mechanic Earl in _Tokyo Drift_. I had a bit of confusion watching
_Fast 9_ having seen _Better Luck Tomorrow_ recently but hadn't seen
_Tokyo Drift_ in a couple of years and I had forgot about the
_Tokyo Drift_ character. To spoil the 2002 movie a bit, Virgil is seriously
injured near the end of it and ambiguously implied to be dead. In the
context of _Better Luck Tomorrow_ it is probably a stronger reading of
the film to believe Virgil died. I don't think I caught that
implication as I watched the film, but I understand it reading some of
the synopses of the film better after the fact. So in _Fast 9_ I was
confused into thinking the actor was still playing Han's cousin Virgil
and forgot about Earl. It almost played better that way, and I figured
another more overt nod to _Better Luck Tomorrow_ would make sense to
strengthen its ties to the franchise, but eventually I was reminded
that Earl was in fact a different _Tokyo Drift_ character.  In a
franchise like _Fast & Furious_ where death is a little more fluid, it
is possible to read the death as faked/witness protection and the two
characters as the same, especially with the timejump shenanigans of
where _Tokyo Drift_ exists in the franchise timeline now. Given that
movie's emphasis on blood relative family, having another actual
cousin in the mix makes sense to me, but I'm not sure if that was
Justin Lin's intention in reusing the _Tokyo Drift_ character. (If it
were the intention I'm sure Lin could have worked in a more obvious
line about it.)

Drifting back hard in the other direction to slalom towards a point to
a lot of this setup: In many of the same interviews where Justin Lin
admitted to more than a little bit thinking of _Better Luck Tomorrow_
as the "official" origin story of Han in the Franchise, Justin Lin
admitted that it was the "Justice for Han" hashtags and fan campaigns
surrounding _Fate of the Furious_ that sparked his interest in returning
to direct another installment in the franchise (having direct 3-6 and
stepping away for 7 and 8), and you can see why as a writer and
director Justin Lin felt more than a little ownership of the
character. [At the time I was of the belief that _Fate of the Furious_
handled the situation of Deckard Shaw being brought into the Family
relatively well]({% post_url 2017-04-19-fate-furious %}) within the
logic of the franchise and especially the
beliefs in second chances for Family and life after parole (given how
many served time in prison at one point or another or otherwise lived
gray area lives). So while I didn't see anything specific to fix with
respect to Shaw, I have to thank that hashtag/fan campaign for
delivering something I had been feeling a need for since the first
time I saw _Tokyo Drift_, but especially had been asking for and
wanting since my marathon session with films 1-7: that missing Heist
act from _Tokyo Drift_. (6 films later and 15 years later, which is
such an amazing distance in any franchise for such an act of
storytelling closure.)

# Tokyo Space Drift

_Fast 9_ is almost entirely Heist. It doesn't deviate entirely from
the formula as it does start with a RACE! which it uses to setup Dom's
physical brother and a decent reason for why Dom, who is all about
Family, wouldn't mention his blood brother for like two decades. (Less
reason why his sister might not talk about him for like two decades,
but maybe it was tough finding an actress for a Young Mia.) It also
has some Character Building and a tiny bit of Car Building spread
thinly across most of what follows, but not directly as a formulaic
"act" on its own because it just about immediately jumps into world trotting Heist
mode. (This fits the far more action films 7 and 8 anyway.)

All of this Heist in such a Heist-forward film, I believe, finally
resolves leftover third act "heist energy" from _Tokyo Drift_ and is
almost entirely in service to resolving/bettering it. I like the
gentle retcons in _Fast 9_ tying together that jump in "level" between
Heists in 4-6 and 7 with Gisele mentioned having worked for/with Mr.
Nobody (and that bringing Han directly to Mr. Nobody's attention) and
Dom's brother Jakob having also worked for some time with Mr. Nobody
giving Mr. Nobody plenty of time and reason to scrutinize the
remainder of the team as well. It adds yet another layer to why
_Tokyo Drift_ didn't directly have a heist and yet another layer to what the
"heist below the surface" was in Han's accident.

Even the top level plot of Dom's physical brother and the macguffin
that's basically a replica of _Furious 7_'s macguffin with a smarter
(biometric) lock is almost entirely in service to _Tokyo Drift_ from
the standpoint of contrasting Dom's physical brother with Dom's
spiritual brothers including and especially Han. Coming to something
of a direct comparison when it turns out that Han was physically
protecting the macguffin's key. Jakob also serves as asking the
"Deckard Shaw question" again to Dom. I like that in setting it up as
a direct hypocrisy versus the Deckard Shaw case, with Dom holding a
grudge against Jakob for decades but giving Shaw a quicker chance
(though maybe because of Shaw's awesome mum) for parole/for
redemption, it ends up doing a pretty good argument for what I felt
about _Fate of the Furious_ that the parole/time served logic holds up
in Dom's world more than some of the people that disagreed with 
_Fate of the Furious_ seem to think. Tying that to Dom's own literal first
sentence of time served in prison seems to underscore that metaphor
quite literally. _Fast 9_ doesn't revert the fast heel-turn-face of
_Fate of the Furious_, it deepens the conversation and gives another
shot at a fun heel-turn-face with Jakob, and yet still further
extending the family (even if this time back to an old family member).

Of course the meat of the film that most directly serves it as a
proper sequel to _Tokyo Drift_ is that Sean, Earl, Twinkie, and even
(most major spoiler, but teased in some of the trailers) Han are all back in play
as pieces in the Heist for the first time. Sean isn't given an excuse
to use his drifting skills in service of the Heist, but Han does
manage an impressive drift at a key moment in Heist-related car
chases. Overall in general, _Fast 9_ has the second most plot-critical
drifting after _Tokyo Drift_, almost as if all that drift work has
finally started to matter. Though possibly the most impressive drift
in the film is Shaw's Mum (Magdalene) and an impressive Dom-assisted
e-brake drift. Maybe Shaw's Mum spent some time in Tokyo, too? Also,
the entire "super magnet" thing gives a fun reason to do a lot of
drifting (even if most of it is physics-bending magnet assisted), and
maybe most if it is less impressive for being so assisted. (But very
few of the main Family had a chance to "study the drift" in Tokyo, so
some assists make sense.)

Sean, Earl, and Twinkie get a chance to show up as "out of the
ordinary" car guys and do get a chance to shine here, in a way that
feels perfectly logical an extension from their work/play in Tokyo. As
soon as it was clear they were working on rocket cars I said to
myself, "Ah yes, space _is_ the ultimate drift." Everything about this
conclusion jump made perfect logical sense in the Franchise's version
of logic. I was quite pleased that the followed Chekov's Rocket Car to
it's obvious third act conclusion, too. Space is the ultimate drift.

(Admittedly I have no problems with the series playing with space [and
using cars to get there], I think that’s hilarious. I have long
joked that the way their budgets appear to be tied together that the
*Fast & Furious* movies were always a meandering, slow burn prequel to
the *Riddick* movies. I’m not saying Fast 9 is proof, but I am
thinking about how it might be.)

Obviously the biggest deal in *Fast 9* was its second retcon of Han’s
crash. From a random crash designed only to up dramatic stakes way
back fifteen years ago in *Tokyo Drift*, it’s now an international
nexus event for a high stakes spy/counter-spy operation. Deckard Shaw
wanted to send a message about blood family to the extended Family.
Now we find out that Han and Mr. Nobody used the accident as a smoke
screen cover to fake Han’s death (and indirectly screw with Shaw).

It leads additional credence to why Mr. Nobody was so quick to parole
Shaw and try to get him to play nice with the family. It makes you
question Han’s judgment on sending a cryptic postcard back to the
family that was clearly too subtle for Dom. Dom made the entire trip
to Tokyo presumably because of that postcard, listened to Sean
describe Han’s death (in *Tokyo Drift* and *Furious 7*) and then just
went home (angry at Shaw). Maybe Dom should have thought to bring
Lettie or Mia the first time? Though I suppose Mr. Nobody could have
done a far better job of recruiting Shaw than making a lot of people
believe he killed Han for years.

*Fast 9* was a wild ride. I didn’t go into it expecting to feel like
"wow, that was closure I’ve been expecting for more than a decade
and a half", and certainly it wasn’t planned as such. No one
plotting a movie is intentionally going to plan "and then six movies
later Sean, Earl, and Twinkie are going to help two extended Family
members get to space to stop a macguffin while Han (who’s back!)
guards the key for that macguffin (who also guards herself; new
Family!)." But that’s the series we’ve got, in all its drifting
twists and I’m clearly ecstatic about this lunacy enough to spend
kilos of words on the subject. Looking forward to
*Fast Ten Your Seatbelts* and wherever we are taking this Cypher business next
and how many movies before she makes her own parole and (inevitably?)
joins the Family.

(Also yeah, if the final title is not *Fast Ten Your Seatbelts*, we riot.)
