---
title: "Film of the Moment: Slipstream (1989)"
tags: [films]
---

I realize that I fell out of the habit of "of the Moment" posts as so
much of that sort of discussion moved to social media. I was reminded that it
might be fun to adapt this Mastodon thread that started as a
discussion on Discord into a "proper" blog post.

A Discord-posted meme of a tweet of how hard Mark Hamill looks in
_Slipstream,_ a 1989 rarely seen film, reminded me that the movie had
been sitting in my "To Watch" pile for some time. I did not recall why
it was on the "To Watch" pile, it might have been because it was a
"lost classic", it might have been as a "so bad it is good 'classic'",
given the age of how long it had been on my "To Watch" pile it might
have been something random like possibly people talking about the
credits of Robbie Coltrane around the time of his passing. I may never
know, I did not take good notes.

The reminder that it was on my "To Watch" pile sparked the curiosity
to re-check on it on JustWatch, which told me that Tubi had it free
for streaming (with ads) and with encouragement from that Discord
channel I decided to watch it.

The was directed by Steven Lisberger best known for _Tron_, and was
his fifth and final film. IMDB says that the movie didn't get much of
any US release in 1989 because the production had bankrupted the
producer, most famously a producer of Star Wars. Interestingly, it
doesn't seem to have been budget overruns or the other usual reasons
for a production to bust: that producer went through a messy divorce
that allegedly included awarding the ex-wife the royalties from Star
Wars which was exactly where the _Slipstream_budget was coming from.
Oops.

I thought _Slipstream_ wild and mostly fun. It was sometimes hilarious
in its schlocky, trope-filled pulp dialog. My overall impression was
that it was a bit of a "lost classic" in that way that if I'd stumbled
upon it on VHS in a hidden weird shelf at a Blockbuster at the right
age in the 90s I might have loved the movie growing up.

The closest comparison for several reasons seems to be _Waterworld_,
despite _Waterworld_ having been produced after _Slipstream_.
_Slipstream_ plays as something of an "Airpunk" _Waterworld_ (an_
Airworld_? [^1]). It was equally a flop like _Waterworld_ for budgetary
reasons, but where _Waterworld_ simply spent too much, _Slipstream_
seems cheaper and overall probably well budgeted if the personal
mistakes of the publisher hadn't interfered. _Waterworld_ has a
seriousness to it that plays corny, whereas _Slipstream_ seemed to me
to have an intentional playful corniness throughout (that trope-filled
pulp dialog, for instance), in ways that evoked to me a lot of old
pulp novels and radio/TV serials. (Much as _Star Wars_ and _Indiana
Jones_ mine those old tropes.)

The opening narration introduces us to the idea that after a
convergence of terrible climate change disasters, most of what remains
of humanity are only connected via a harsh air current known as the
slipstream. (No need to wonder what the title of the film refers to.)
The other obvious type of film to compare this to is a _Mad Max_-style
"post-apocalyptic road trip adventure", with the interesting twist
that all the "cars" in _Slipstream_ are gliders and small aircraft.
That gifts us a lot of great B-Roll and C-Roll footage of small planes
through valleys in Ireland and Turkey for the film's version
of a cave-filled, wind swept post-apocalypse. From the opening
overture the score goes all out to sell these plane trips as
incredibly important and maybe goes harder than it should, but I
greatly enjoyed that. Later in the movie those types of establishing
shots also introducing the movie's few "drop" tracks, amusingly
diegetic in those moments and some equally harder than they needed to
be tracks.

The movie is just full of some of the wildest (and most fun)
performances. The aforementioned Mark Hamill plays a blond-dyed
fascist cop and seems to have great fun hamming it up as the primary
antagonist of the film. (The above mentioned tweet was correct, his
hair dye and the films costuming choices go a lot harder than they
need to, like he was a cut extra from a _Matrix_ sequel, but work well
in the context of the movie.) The primary protagonist of the film is
pre-_Twister_ Bill Paxton having some of the most wild-eyed fun
possible, getting some of the worst, most hilarious one-liner dialog,
and chewing scenery along with it. Pre-_Jurassic Park_ Ben Peck (as in
"Clever Girl" Muldoon) plays the heart out of a role that is too easy
for me to accidentally spoil. There's a blink and you will miss it
cameo from Ben Kingsley. Robbie Coltrane has the chance to steal a
couple of wild scenes. F. Murray Abramsom gets a strong scene. Just
about everyone in the movie seems to have the right idea of what sort
of movie they are in.

Strange caveats to mention:

* The violence isn't that remarkable for a PG-13 film, but the sexual
innuendo and near-nudity is kind of interesting. Some of the "sex
scenes" were quite weird, had some crazy dialog that would have made
parents I recall in the 90s super mad (but probably would have passed
my own parents' inspection at the right age, I think).
* There's a third act plot choice that feels very "nearly a fridging"
that feels somewhat problematic by today's standards.
* There's an "enemies to lovers" journey across the film full of some
questionable content, and what I thought was some questionably
problematic consent issues, especially in a late scene involving
handcuffs.

Other than that it was a fun "so (intentionally) bad it is good" movie
with an interesting "lost classic" history and vibe to it.

----

[^1]: Does that imply the eventual existence of an _Earthworld_
    and a _Fireworld_? No one will expect it when the _Fireworld_ movie
    drops.
