---
title: '"Pub" Vinaigrette'
tags: [food]
---

I heard once that you can tell someone's commitment to veganism by
their collection of oils and vinegars. I'm not sure how true that is,
but I do love a vinaigrette and Good Seasons carafes have taught me
that it's very easy to experiment with vinaigrettes to get extra
flavors, whether you use a Good Seasons "Italian Dressing" packet or
not. I appreciate Good Seasons as a simple brand that isn't afraid to
let you explore. Just in exploring the vinaigrette possibility space I
have been collecting a wide variety of oils and vinegars.

One of my recurring experiments has been with a "Pub" Vinaigrette. The
basic idea was that I sometimes love a splash of Malt Vinegar on a
fish and chips meal like many do, and I was trying to figure out what
sorts of vinaigrette you could make with it. I was especially trying
to tap into something with the spirit of "this is a salad dressing you
might find to partner with fish and chips as one big pub meal". I
think of it the house dressing of a weird pub trying to source a
vinaigrette mostly from ingredients at hand or at least "close to
home". Of course, Malt Vinegar has a very strong flavor profile so
finding the other elements to pair with it was tough and took some
play/experimentation.

I didn't think Olive Oil was right to pair with Malt Vinegar, and you
would be wasting good olive oil taste in the way it would disagree
with the Malt Vinegar I felt.

You could use a boring Vegetable or Canola oil, and that might be
appropriate given the boring oils typically used for frying fish and
chips. I nearly stopped at that almost fine solution.

The discovery that really cracked the experimental project wide open
for me was Avocado Oil. Avocado Oil has a rich and nutty flavor, not
entirely what you would expect thinking about guacamole, but a flavor
to its own. It's a strong flavor that doesn't get rolled over by Malt
Vinegar like Vegetable Oil would, nor do I think it clashes quite like
Olive Oil would. I think it adds a "chips" feel, almost the bite of a
nuttier potato, when paired with the malt vinegar.

The big variable in my experiments so far have been been the amount of
mustard that I've added. I think this "Pub" Vinaigrette works well
unseasoned without mustard. I think a hint of mustard makes it more
interesting. I've been working up to seeing how much mustard I can
add. Because I love strong mustard, I want more mustard salad dressing
options that aren't a cream or dijon (honey mustard or not). I
associate Colman's Mustard with fish and chips night at a pub
sometimes too, from some appetizers that come to mind, and keep
wondering how much I can dial up "Pub" Vinaigrette towards that goal.
So far I've not been disappointed with my experiments. In my most
recent attempt I used almost a third or more of a entire shaker of
ground mustard, believe this may definitely be a dressing where the
more mustard the merrier. With that much ground mustard mixed it
turned out almost lighter than the color of orange juice (despite how
dark the vinegar and oil both are), and when the dressing separated
between uses (and reshakes) it made a lovely "sunrise".

The one variable that remains on my idea board is that though I
dismissed Olive Oil as the base oil in theory I like the concept of
using a splash or more of olive brine (possibly in place of some of
the water content?), which occurred to me as an interesting nod to a
Dirty Martini. I've not actually tried this yet, though.
