---
title: The Prismatic Decimal System
tags: [fiction]
---

I'd had a passive interest in finding this novel for years. It had
been first mentioned to me in the footnote of an autobiography of a
modest local 1950s television star as a favorite novel of her
childhood. Though she referenced it only directly in passing in the
flow of a larger discussion of her much beloved children's show, there
was a sense that perhaps this book played a larger role in some of the
creative spark of the show as a whole. I had a sense that there were a
lot indirect references and in jokes to that novel in that section and
I was curious to find out more. It seemed implied that the book was a
well beloved book at least regionally and the author presumed some
familiarity with the contents of that book. I didn't think I could
tell for sure without reading that novel on my own so I added it to a
wishlist at the local free public library.

The library's online records told me the history of only the last
three copies of the book in the system, though I was glad for whatever
librarian had inputted even that much information into the digital
systems about a 1910s small press book from a publisher that lasted
only a dozen years and never really sold much outside this city.
Unfortunately for my search the last three copies were listed as
"damaged beyond repair", "sold at fundraising auction", and "on
inter-library loan; overdue for return as of 03/1972". I figured that
was the end of my search, but I knew enough to leave it on my wishlist
as sometimes inter-library loans would turn back up (even ones somehow
decades overdue) or a librarian would spot an archived copy. What I
thought most likely this century and given the book was on the edge of
being public domain even in 1972 (given the publisher bankruptcy, and
no known author's estate, probably extremely likely it was already
public domain then) sometimes a scanning group would find a copy and
build an ebook. The wishlist had automatically sent me e-copies of
other strange finds over the years.

What I least expected was the handwritten letter that arrived on the
library's letterhead years after I'd even forgot placing it on my
wishlist. It was a pleasant surprise and I was almost surprised how
much I appreciated it more then than had it shown up as email.

"Dear Ms. Lynne,

"It came to my recent attention in discussing books with one Mr.
Forsberg that he has a copy of J. Y. Milburn's *Flight Into Night— A
Slumbering Fantasia* in his private collection. I mentioned knowing at
least one library patron with it wishlisted as to read for several
years ongoing and that apparently piqued Mr. Forsberg's curiosity. Mr.
Forsberg made it clear that he does not loan books of such vintage to
the library or its patrons as a general policy, but that this was a
particularly interesting book worth loaning to a new reader, if he
were given the opportunity to meet with the patron, face to face,
first. It's rarely good library policy to recommend engaging a private
collector in a direct manner such as this, but Mr. Forsberg is a close
friend both to me personally and to the library system as a whole and
I promised to at least pass the offer to visit his private collection
and maybe loan this book you've been looking for. Mr. Forsberg assured
me that it would be worth your time to read this book and he'd love to
make that connection. Please find attached Mr. Forsberg's card should
you be interested.

"Regards and thank you for patronage and the time out of your day to
read this letter,

"Verity Hayward"

I had no trouble finding the card Mx. Hayward had attached to the
letter. "X. Forsberg, Raconteur (Retired)" was the dominant text on
it, with only a phone number, what appeared to be a bare street name
with no other address part but the county's name beside it. I was
weary about anyone that might call themselves a "raconteur", of
course, but something about that "(Retired)" seemed humanizing to me,
and I wasn't sure why I felt that way.

It took me a few days to decide if I would reach out to Mr. Forsberg.
It seemed like a lot of effort to go through just for a chance to read
a book that had been suggested to me merely by recommendation of a
footnote of an autobiography. But I was also never one to turn down
any kind recommendation from a librarian, and especially not one sent
as a handwritten note (though admittedly this was my first). I have
always trusted librarians as a general rule, but if you cannot trust a
librarian named after "Truth" I'm not sure who in the world you could
trust, even if I don't think I've met Mx. Hayward in my tiny branch I
most often frequent. 

Pushing my courage and pressed by my curiosity on one rainy afternoon
I finally convinced myself to call the number on Mr. Forsberg's card.
It took me a moment to find where I had last hidden the Phone app on
my home screen, having so much less need of it this century. This
ritual search added its own little needles of anxiety into the
process. I was surprised when the ring was answered almost immediately
by what sounded like a aged and yet sweetly voice, "Mr. Forsberg's
private residence, who may I say is calling?"

"June Lynne, I received Mr. Forsberg's card from a librarian to
discuss Milburn's 'Flight Into Night'?" I didn't mean for it to be a
question, but it certainly came out as one in that moment between
nerves and hesitancy.

The voice on the other end sounded excited and happy for me, "Oh
excellent! Mr. Forsberg adores that book. Yes, Mr. Forsberg would be
delighted to extend you an invitation to meet with him here at his
residence to discuss it. Unfortunately, Mr. Forsberg keeps a very busy
schedule so it can't entirely be at your convenience. Mr. Forsberg's
calendar suggests that this Saturday Afternoon say at 3 PM would work
best for him, would you be available?"

"I, uh, yeah I can make that work." I did not expect things to move so
fast to a scheduled appointment, but had to admit I was free Saturday
night.

"Excellent. I will let Mr. Forsberg know to you expect you here around
then. Anything else I can help you with?"

"I'm not sure I know what the address is?"

There was a pause, then a hesitant, "I believe it should have been on
the card?"

"Oh, well there's a street name but there doesn't seem to be a street
number."

"Yes, that's the address."

That was not at all the answer I was expecting, but I was not going to
let my confusion trap me in a longer phone call, "Alright, thank you,"
and we exchanged the usual phone conversation ending pleasantries and
hung up.

That Saturday was warm, but not too warm, and overall a lovely bright
day. I was surprised that the maps app on my phone had no trouble
finding the address as I started to type it. As secretive as Mr.
Forsberg seemed to, only passing his address around on physical cards
it seemed, he couldn't stop it from being indexed into all the usual
databases. Though I appreciated that a lot in this case because I had
no idea how I would have found the address if it hadn't been
searchable on the phone app, I know I've become too reliant. I guessed
I'd try to call a librarian at that point, but I had a route and that
was a theory I didn't need to test.

The route took me down a city highway I've driven a million times and
yet somehow just two turns off it I entered what felt like a forest.
There was no room in my mental map of the city for this forest, and I
would imagine even a small park in this area would be something that
I'd recall noticing on maps before. The phone's satellite imagery
reassured me that this forest had probably been here the whole time
and it was maybe my mental map that needed updating, but these trees
felt too old and wild to be contained somewhere in a city's limits.
The street that was the entirety of the address was a small country
gravel road leading deeper into the forest. A country gravel road was
also something that didn't quite fit on my mental map of this part of
the city. It wasn't very far along the gravel road before it opened up
into a giant clearing. Here the satellite map showed a blur where the
clearing must be, in the center of the forest and I presumed that at
least some privacy could be bought even in the satellite age. Between
that and the number of buildings that were scattered across the
clearing I was starting to get an impression of an eccentric amount of
wealth involved (if I'd not already been making assumptions from the
card and the phone call).

The residence campus, and it seemed like a small college campus of
some strange sort, had a clear house looking building centrally beside
the gravel road, which seemed the most obvious place to stop and park.
My eyes wandered across the other buildings. They had a variety of
architecture styles and materials that seemed to imply an organic
growth over many decades. Only a few of them seemed to offer any
direct hints of their use. There was one full of windows and a lot of
fog on its windows yet greenery visible where you could see through it
implying a green house or conservatory of some sort. There was (if I
was counting the number of sides correctly) an hexagonal building with
an intriguing glass dome atop that I clocked as the library only once
I realized that seated on plinths flanking the entrance were
engravings of probably Athena or perhaps Minerva, marking it a hall
for wisdom.

I had barely mounted the steps towards the porch of main house when a
matronly stout woman bearing an iPad like a weapon arrived to
intercept me from further around the porch (which appeared to wrap the
entire house). With a deft, practiced maneuver she moved the iPad up
and under the crook of her left shoulder, and extended her right hand
in greetings, "Ms. Lynne, I presume?" I nodded as I took her hand into
handshake and she continued, "I'm Mrs. Montgomery, Mr. Forsberg's
Chief Executive Officer, we spoke on the phone the other day. Mr.
Forsberg has decided to take tea in the garden on this delightful
afternoon," her handshake was firm and commanding, "If you will follow
me, I will lead you to the garden." She broke the handshake,
unholstered the iPad and glanced at it, then proceeded to lead me
around the house.

From the first moment of meeting Mr. Forsberg I had a very tough time
deciding if he were some sort of monster or some sort of muppet. As he
unfolded himself from the garden chair, he kept seemingly growing
until he stood above me at what should have been an inhuman height. He
was tall and angular, yet seemingly far too skinny for his frame, in a
way that looked like someone had accidentally stretched a small boy
out longwise like pulling taffy. He was possibly the ugliest man I had
ever met in person, yet somehow one of the most charming as well.
There were hidden delights in the way his eyes glittered in the
sunlight, and every part of him animated with more life than the
average person seemed to. Somehow a part of me kept being surprised by
that over-exaggerated animation and it's surprising grace and fluidity
despite a seemingly very awkward and gawky frame making the movements
that much more implied to me that just out of range of my eyes were
marionette strings or a puppeteer's arm. They say that when you meet a
muppet like Kermit it's very easy to get taken into the illusion and
you don't want to see the strings or puppeteers after only a few
moments working with him, and not even moments into a handshake with
Mr. Forsberg I had decided that I did not want to dispel the illusion
and check to see if he was a muppet, even if I would constantly be
confused for the rest of my relationship with him that I would never
decide if he was more monster or muppet.

Mr. Forsberg invited me to take tea with him and within moments of my
acceptance and a light few presses by Mrs. Montgomery on that tablet
of hers, a cook had brought me a cup of Orange Pekoe and an assortment
of light cheeses and olives to accompany it. Somewhere in the middle
of pleasantries such as the lovely Saturday afternoon weather and the
beautiful garden around us, Mr. Forsberg offered, "Please, call me
Xavier if you would like," and I was charmed by it in part because of
the somewhat incongruous feeling knowing his first name gave me. It
did not strike me as the sort of first name of either a monster or a
muppet, and maybe not even a first name I would expect from someone so
seemingly always formal by contagious force such as Mr. Forsberg.
Somehow settling into calling him Xavier did not dissuade him from
sticking to "Ms. Lynne" in all cases of address. It started to give me
the impression that "Raconteur (Retired)" was much less a
self-described affectation and somehow an accidental label given him
by some rival. I shouldn't have found it charming, but it came across
to me as very charming and somehow natural and native to Mr. Forsberg.

Eventually the general pleasantries gave way to the specifics and
Xavier asked how I’d become aware of Milburn’s “Flight Into
Night” and I mentioned that autobiographical footnote that had lead
me down the curious path to meeting Mr. Forsberg. Xavier nodded, and
admitted to having also read that autobiography. I mentioned my
thoughts from the time I read it that perhaps Milburn’s “Flight
Into Night” played a larger role in the context of the children’s
show and its origins than just a single footnote might imply. Xavier
nodded along and then congratulated me on my “astute
observations”.

We sat in comfortable garden white noise (some eager crickets, some
birds chattering sweetly among themselves). I realized I had finished
the available cheese and olives and my tea was finished.

“Well,” Mr. Forsberg cleared the silence somewhat hesitantly, “I
can tell you are fellow book reader after my own heart and I would
love to hear your book report on Milburns’s work once you finish it.
I’d love to give you access to my family’s library.”

Xavier suddenly had a key in the palm of his hand. I did not catch it
if he had palmed it from a jacket pocket from one of his big sweeping
gesticulations or even perhaps if some puppeteer’s stage hand had
placed it there. (Though I was only somewhat disappointed the key was
simply a standard modern Yale lock, not some monstrous ancient cast
iron thing or something even more fantastically fairy tale.)

Xavier moved to hand me the key but then paused, “I’m afraid I
must add one more stipulation to the terms: none of the books are to
leave the grounds. Though you will be treated as a very welcome guest.
You will be free to come and go as you please. I’m sure that Mrs.
Montgomery had already logged your vehicle into the security systems
and will only need a head’s up in the case you plan to arrive in a
different one. She can show you how to request tea service if you wish
for it, and I’m sure the chefs would be happy to account for you in
meal planning if provided enough lead time. I’m biased of course,
but I believe there are many fantastic spots, hidden and not so
hidden, to fall into a book throughout my homestead. On days such as
this, you might make use of this garden, of course, or there are
hiking paths out to some lovely little grottoes and scenic points. One
of my favorites has a surprising view of the downtown skyline. Indoors
there are of course study nooks throughout the library and I would be
happy to introduce you to some of the lesser used studies and sitting
rooms in some of the guest buildings if you want some variety.”

It was my turn to hesitate as that was a lot to take in. It certainly
was inconvenient, but there seemed to be far worse places to read
interesting books than gardens and library nooks where someone else's
job is to serve you tea. I also found that I was appreciating thanks
to such a rapid infodump how much Mr. Forsberg's hesitancy was perhaps
more an over-eager hope of and concern for being a good host than a
worry what sort of person he was giving access to his family's
library. I realized I had something of a term of my own as I thought
about Xavier's offer, "I really appreciate the offer, Xavier. If I may
add a term of my own? If the book is what I've heard it to be, it
belongs in the public domain. I'd love to scan your copy to make it
accessible as an ebook for others that may not receive such a generous
offer from a wealthy patron."

There was a very complex wash of emotions across Mr. Forsberg's face,
too fast for me to catch any particular individual ones, but he
settled into a response I did not expect from someone of his presumed
wealth, "Ms. Lynne, it would pain me greatly to let you volunteer such
labor when I can easily pay for it. I've brought in Ms. Hayward as a
consultant on several of my past library science needs and she's been
nothing but professional in projects such as that. But first, I would
certainly appreciate your opinion on that large _if_ that you brought
up. It is a remarkable book in my opinion, but I shall await your own
book report to compare notes, Ms. Lynne. We can discuss things like
scanning that book after you've read it and given it time to digest,
yes?"

Here again I found such an interesting and effectively charming
eagerness in Xavier's eyes especially. I nodded in agreement, it made
enough sense, and reached out my hand. He gently dropped the key into
my own hand and clasped my hand in something that wasn't quite a
handshake and wasn't quite a gentle pet, before just as gently
releasing my hand.

"Wonderful, Ms. Lynne. I am eager to hear your book report. I've found
that first impressions of the family library are most interesting
without a formal tour. Perhaps when you are ready to deliver your book
report I'll explain a bit more and show you some of the library's more
hidden features. I can have Mrs. Montgomery show you to the library
building so you can get started."

I smiled, "I believe it's the hexagonal building I spotted from the
street with the engravings of Athena watching its door?"

"Yes, of course! Very astute," and with that great smile of an
acknowledgement from Xavier, which I found strangely warming, I stood
and thanked Mr. Forsberg again for the opportunity to make use of his
personal library. 

Standing just outside the library door I had a sense that the Forsberg
Family Library was probably bigger than my entire regular branch of
the free public library. (Though I liked that it was one of the
smaller branches.) The exterior door of the library lead into a very
simple vestibule. A couple of antique looking brass lamps lit up as I
opened the door and I presumed they were on a modern motion sensor.
Despite being a couple of relatively small lamps with modern LED bulbs
(I presumed) they did a great job lighting the entire vestibule. On
one side was a tiny cloak closet and the other an old fashioned card
catalog. Relatedly, a QR code had been printed and posted above the
card catalog. A note beside it that I recognized in Ms. Hayward's
handwriting stated simply "Use QR code for other catalog services, but
please continue to use the card catalog as the main index. -V". I of
course knew the author I was looking for so I only needed the main
index, presuming it was sorted by author name. I was glad for having
had an eccentric elementary school teacher of mine force us all to
learn the basics of a card catalog, despite it being an incredibly
useless skill these days when all library catalogs were digital.

I opened the drawer that promised to contain Milburn, J. Y. and was
immediately drawn into how much of a colorful explosion the cards
were, and I wound up taking my time flipping through its contents in
search of the card I needed. Every card had the expected author name
and book title on the left hand side, and various other details such
as descriptions or author blurbs printed below those. Every card also
had at least a square of color in the upper right, like a test swatch
from a painting company. In a few cases the entire cards were painted
or printed the color of the upper right swatch. In some fun cases I
stumbled across the swatch expanded out into mini-paintings and
embellishments, such as on the card for Melville's Moby Dick where the
blue swatch color was part of a blue whale trying to swallow the book
description. Below the color swatches were decimal numbers, but they
certainly didn't seem to align with Dewey Decimal numbers in the
slightest. For one thing, even fiction works such as that Moby Dick
card I passed across had these decimal numbers, which Dewey himself
never bothered with, and for another the few Dewey Decimal categories
I could recall off hand when I saw similar numbers flip past did not
match the expected contents at all. The card for Milburn, J. Y "Flight
Into Night— A Slumbering Fantasia" was in the catalog right where I
expected it to be. It had a very interesting crimson/purple shade as
its color swatch, perhaps resembling the tones of the later parts of
dusk. A part of me wanted to keep shuffling through the cards to see
what other details might pop out at me, but I was also very curious
now to see the library itself.

With the book's card in hand I swung the door open to the library
proper. The vestibule door opened up into a massive flood of natural
light from the dome overhead. The vestibule felt claustrophobic in
comparison to the wall of light that spilled out from the building's
interior. That moment of transition took my breath away even before I
started to take in the contents of the library itself. The vestibule
hadn’t seemed that dark while exploring the card catalog, but it
felt like it took a while for my eyes to adjust to the much brighter
building interior. Even before the shift to lending mostly ebooks,
I’m not sure if my regular library branch ever had nearly as many
shelves as I could see in this private library. The hexagonal shape of
the exterior patterned the interior as well. All six interior walls
were lined with shelves of course, including the wall behind me with
the library’s entrance door buried in the center of shelves. Looking
towards the interior were concentric hexagonal rings of even more
shelves, slowly growing in height as they progressed toward the center
and an impressively looming central hexagonal spire of shelves. From
the entrance angle it felt like the shelves almost made stairs for a
giant to ascend to a throne just below the dome.

The shelves weren’t all entirely filled, presumably giving things
room to grow, but it was still impressive just how many books I could
see even before I started to explore the rings in more detail. The
most prominent feature of the shelves, though, was that the covers of
the books that shared each shelf all shared similar colors to each
other, with subtle gradient shifts across the shelves. Each triangular
sextant of the library was dominated by a single primary color, and
there seemed to be a pattern to the flow of the colors between and
among the rings. It was a beautiful color wheel that seemed to be the
central pattern to the library, though it didn’t seem to exactly
match any color wheel I was familiar with.

I could easily see why the swatch colors dominated the library’s
cards so much. Assuming you weren’t color blind I could tell that
you could track down individual books just by color sample alone as
you got used to how the colors shift across the color hexagons. It was
also quickly clear to me based on how the shelves were marked that the
decimal numbers were still very handy for finding books. The hundreds
place seemed to exactly match the sextants numbered 1 through 6. The
tens and ones places gave a sense of which ring, though it wasn’t an
exact or clear cut match. I had no idea what the decimals might
represent, but there were sometimes six or seven digits. Between the
decimal number and the color swatch it didn't take me hardly any time
to find the book I was looking for. It was between a treatise on art
deco architecture and a biography of a Russian playwright, and I
certainly had no more idea what the decimal numbers actually
represented in this library as there was clearly no categorical
organization here.

Other than the title and author on the spine of the cover I didn't see
any other marks such as a publisher's mark. As I pulled the book off
the shelf it became clearer that the dust jacket wrapped around the
book was a unique and custom laminated work of art. It had a
startlingly lovely dusk painted across it from back cover to front
cover. The setting sun was featured prominently on the back cover and
a kid whooping and hollering while riding a flying carpet took center
stage on the front cover. No other words or adornments on either back
or front covers except an artist's signature, "R. Forsberg, Jr".
Inside the dust jacket, it was a classic dull brown leather bound book
of the expected sort for its age. I found I really appreciated the
beauty of the custom family cover, helping it to feel at home on such
colorful shelves. A manilla card holder was the only other addition to
the book, and one you would expect of a library. I slid the books card
into its holder, just as expected and wandered over to a nearby study
area to start into the book.

It took me several weeks of trips to the Forsberg Family Library to
finish Milburn's "Flight Into Night". The prose was magical but
incredibly dense and slow to read. Over those weeks I became very
familiar with some of the reading spots in the library itself and in
the garden. I did manage to find the hiking path to the city skyline
overlook Xavier had mentioned. I had Mrs. Montgomery show me a lovely
sitting room in one of the guest buildings when I was craving an
indoor reading spot that was a bit more variety (and a little bit more
cozy and comfortable, like reading on the couch of a beloved great
aunt in her country cottage). I rather took for advantage the staff's
offer of tea service and was amazed at the selection and the variety
of charcuterie and tapas bites that would accompany the pots of tea at
chef's whim. I tried not to take advantage of the meal planning for
somewhat unreasonable fear of never leaving Mr. Forsberg's estate
again if I ate too much of its food. I was afraid of being
accidentally trapped as its prisoner (of exceedingly fine dining, as I
did find out the one weekend I requested it). Across those weeks I saw
Xavier himself only quite rarely and mostly in passing as he was off
to whatever kept him busy on weekends and I was sometimes directly
rushing off to finish the next chapter.

Milburn's "Flight Into Night" itself was equal parts amazing and
infuriating.

The book contained some amazingly imaginative descriptions of a dreamy
wonderland "just beyond the clouds, up the stairs, through the crystal
tunnel, then across the dusk ocean, but only when you are asleep"
named "The Far Kingdom". The protagonist was a tween boy with a love
of adventure and maybe just a bit of narcolepsy, and of course the
adults in his life didn't believe such a wonderland existed, much less
were they interested in helping the poor protagonist in sorting out
the various and sundry political conspiracies threatening to blow up
The Far Kingdom and maybe even the "bland lands" "below" such as the
protagonist's home and all those adults that didn't trust him and
considered him a sad little boy with a mental illness. At the end
about as you would expect the kid solves the political conundrum in a
strange but fun way, wins the interest of the Princess of The Far
Kingdom, and maybe manages to wink-nod earn some respect from the
adults in his real life with a trinket he brings back as the Hero of
the Far Kingdom. Like some of its other near contemporaries such as
_Peter Pan_ or _Wizard of Oz_ or _Little Nemo in Slumberland_ it was
pretty tightly focused on the protagonist's view point and treated the
adventures as very real and quite serious. Like Oz the world seems
setup to be a possible reusable franchise, way back before that was
anywhere near a common thing, though the card catalogs in both the
public library and in the Forsberg Library seem to imply that any
proposed sequel was never written. The obvious reason to assume no
sequel exists is purely economic: the book sold only reasonably well
regionally and the publisher went bankrupt soon after, but I was also
starting to see how some of the more problematic elements of the book
may have also prevented J. Y. Milburn from attempting any longer term
plans with the material.

It was in its problems that the book was incredibly frustrating. For
all of its wonder and twee imaginative descriptions it also contained
deep wells of intentional and accidental racism. The politest
sentiment you might often hear here is that the book was "extremely of
its time", but the view of the book from this particular modern
vantage point seemed to say that maybe it was even worse than its
time. The use of a flying carpet as the primary transport to, from,
and around The Far Kingdom easily implied that Milburn had studied
Arabian Nights and possibly a wealth of other multi-cultural artifacts
and just about every time you started to feel like perhaps the
appropriation was unintentional Milburn introduces yet another racist
caricature or veers rather closely to outright islamophobia or
something worse. Most uncharitably the book is a white savior myth of
a boy colonizing his dream space and winning the "exotic" princess as
a prize for his efforts. Both things are true at once: it's an
imaginatively charming boy's adventure and it's a mess of bad
stereotypes and outdated views and things that are very clearly awful
tropes from a modern lens. Can you forgive the awful parts for the
charm of the good parts? Can you blame a book for perpetuating bad
stereotypes and tropes when historically it may have predated or even
been the cultural source of some of them? I didn't have good answers.
I enjoyed reading the book for the most part, and I enjoyed reading it
in relatively disconnected from the real world context of the Forsberg
Family Library (and its garden and hiking paths and guest sitting
rooms).

When I finished the book I asked Mrs. Montgomery to please schedule
some time to chat about it with Mr. Forsberg. Xavier insisted on lunch
together and I found myself unable to turn down an invitation for
another amazing meal from his chefs.

Over lunch we mostly discussed pleasantries. It was charming and
lovely and the food was as spectacular as I figured it would be. Over
a slice of cake and coffee the conversation finally turned to Milburn
and "Flight Into Night". Mr. Forsberg asked for my report and I found
to my surprise I had a lot to say about it. Enough that the
conversation flowed back out into the garden and into some afternoon
tea. I enjoyed discussing all of the good parts of the book that
captured my imagination. I got somewhat heated discussing the book's
problems and how upsetting some of it had been to read in this decade.
I mentioned my gut instinct that Mr. Milburn was probably even worse
than average of his own time period and it wasn't entirely "it was a
product of its time", the theory that some of its mean spiritedness
and racism was so well read as to be intentional in its appropriation.

As conversation had subsided and with it again the tea and the various
fruits that had accompanied it today (despite how much we ate for
lunch, the bits of fruit felt cleansing and powerful when accompanied
with a delightfully floral green tea), Xavier finally asked the
question I had been dreading, "I'm glad that you enjoyed the book, and
I've appreciated your perspective on its many problems. Given what you
know now of this book, would you still wish to recommend that I pay
someone like Ms. Hayward to scan and OCR the book for consumption by
the internet as an ebook?"

I had been asking myself the same thing for days. I had been at war
between the parts of me that were a big proponent of the public domain
and keeping access to interesting cultural artifacts (especially in an
age when so much of what should be the public domain was gated by
leaseholders demanding rent and we could use all the public domain we
could get), and yet the parts of me that admired it as an interesting
cultural artifact that is so terribly flawed it probably should never
be available in the context of the internet. "No, probably not. I mean
it–" was about all I got out before my brain's own infighting
stopped me short. After hours of talking about the book, talking about
what to do with its future choked me up a bit.

I wasn't sure how much of that Xavier caught nor how much he felt
himself, but he stood, unfolding to forbidding height in the process
as usual, and offered a change of topic, "I offered you a personal
tour of some of the secrets my family's library in exchange for your
book report, would you like to join me?" He offered his hand to me,
and I accepted it.

"My father considered himself a failed painter," Xavier started as he
lead the way in a direction I felt pretty familiar with, "He went to
art school against his father's wishes, was never commercially
successful, and eventually returned home. I'd submit that my father's
view of success was myopic, but I'm biased, in part because our
library was my father's greatest painting. Like many of the greatest
works of art it was never completed in my father's lifetime, but like
only a few truly great works of art this was because it was designed
to be a never ending, living installation."

We started with a lap around the exterior of the building. Mr.
Forsberg was full of facts about little details and secrets his father
had hidden in the architecture, of which his father had first draft,
but it sounded like he'd contributed his own share of details. I have
no real knowledge of architecture with which to appreciate most of
such secrets, but Xavier kindly pointed out that some of the books in
the library could provide additional context if I wanted it. (Though
I'd probably need to look them up via Ms. Hayword's digital secondary
indexes.)

Stepping into the vestibule, after a few fun facts about the brass
lanterns and seeking out a custom LED manufacture for their unique
sockets, Xavier pointed out what I had come to assume about the card
catalog, "My father of course knew about Mr. Dewey's system and he
hated it. He thought that it removed the creativity of unusual
juxtapositions, as you can maybe now guess. He grew up with my
grandfather's random shuffled library, with books in shelves spread
haphazardly throughout the house, and as much as he loved the
unorganized mess he wanted to organize it somehow. He considered Mr.
Dewey's system boring and problematic for the ideas in books to only
be in conversations with each others in the same 'intellectual
category'. Most importantly he thought it robbed books of their
context: pigeon holing books into strict categories implies that
everything about those categories can be exclusively found in those
and only those books, that every book in a category is equally
valuable to current thought on that category, and that perhaps worst
of all the impression of full shelves in a category can give the
impression that everything has already been learned and written down
in that category. My father wasn't trained in the library sciences, he
was a failed painter, so he used the tools that he knew: colors. Then
he arranged them into numbers that made sense to himself and thought
to arrange books by the most interesting color on their spines."

I nodded along at that, and even knew what to fill in of the next
detail thinking of the delightful dusk colors of the cover on
Milburn's "Flight into Night" and the "R. Forsberg, Jr." signature on
it, so I added, "And where books didn't have interesting colored
covers, he painted some beautiful ones himself."

Xavier clapped in delight at my observation, "Indeed. Books were
always my father's greatest muse and organizing the family library
gave him decades of reasons to paint beautiful covers for old books
that needed new or different contexts."

He opened the door into the main hall of the library and ushered me in
before continuing, "Of course, a lot of them needed new contexts,
including Mr. Milburn's _Flight Into Night_. My grandfather and my
great grandfather were quite the collectors in their respective times,
and as you may suspect of nearly any family of multi-generational
wealth in America such as mine we had more than our fair share of that
made on the backs of other people and some of that was intentionally
more than a little racist. My father didn't believe in hiding the
skeletons in the closet, but bringing new contexts and bright shining
light to the horrors, as a reminder and a caution for future
generations." 

Xavier ran a hand over a seeming random shelf and just about
immediately spotted an example, sliding it off the shelf. It had
fascinating bright cover, but intentionally no words on the spine. The
dust jacket cover was another "R. Forsberg, Jr." original, only this
time a gathering of ghosts with shocked and angry faces in horror. Mr.
Forsberg slipped the laminated dust jacket off just enough to reveal
an old leather bound volume with a long disgustingly clinical title
involving "trepanning" and that was more than enough than I needed to
know for why those ghosts were horrified, angry, and shocked. Xavier
shivered in a shared horror of his own, replaced the dust jacket, and
then reshelved the book. He pointed to its neighbors, "Today such a
horror has as its primary chatting companions a field guide on birding
and a novel about teenage self-esteem. Perhaps it will learn from such
better neighbors. I've had Ms. Hayward project my father's
idiosyncratic system to Mr. Dewey's and even modern color numbers such
as HSL and CIELab, but the idiosyncratic system is what makes this
library the strange incomplete work of art that it is."

I felt like I was still reeling at the given "random" example, "Why
wouldn't you burn a book that awful rather than shelve it?"

Mr. Forsberg's eyebrow quirked up, "Weren't you the one trying to
convince me of the value of old books to the public domain as a term
of accessing this library?"

I sharply inhaled as if hit. He was obviously right, and I suppose
that now I had a lot more context to work on, including the racism I
had directly combated in my reading of Milburn's "Flight Into Night".

Xavier smiled and there was a kindness I didn't expect or know what to
do with in his muppet of a monster's face after such a surprising
insult, "Come, please. Allow me to show you my favorite secret in the
library." It dawned on me that this wasn't the first time that he had
had a conversation such as this, and that as embarrassed and pained as
I felt from his response, I had a lot more reason to understand that
complex wash of emotions when I had so casually discussed scanning
books for posterity. This family's library was for a different sort of
posterity, as it collected as much of the bad as the good.

He lead me to the opposite wall in the hexagon from the vestibule
door. He ran a hand along the shelves looking for a particular volume
and it shouldn't have surprised me when pulling it off the shelf
revealed a hidden button behind it. Pressing the button made the sound
of a great mechanical "kerchunk" of presumably a locking mechanism and
then just as smoothly as Xavier replaced the book on its shelf an
entire section of shelf next to that book slid out on rollers as a
hidden door. Behind the door was a simple flight of stairs running up
from the main hall of the library. I spent so much time in the library
and I would not have suspected a hidden door or that the hidden door
might have stairs leading up of all places. I eagerly followed Mr.
Forsberg up the steps to see where they lead.

"Oh wow," I stated overwhelmed and feeling like such words were not
near enough as I stepped out from the stairway into a gallery tucked
under the dome. Below the gallery you could see the entire color wheel
(color hex) of the library laid out before you as a beautiful rainbow
room. I wasn't sure what sort of magic angles had been applied to the
shelves below to deliver the "trump l'oiel" special effect below that
made it feel to me like I could see all the colors of the covers of
the books from no matter what angle I was looking down from as I
gently wandered the circular gallery.

Xavier chuckled at the way I was straining my head around trying to
see if I could catch the trick of it, and he gave me some time before
finally filling the space with the rest of the conversation as if it
hadn't been interrupted by beauty below our feet, "This is the big
reason I felt I must insist the books don't leave the family's
grounds, this final overhead context. Just as culture itself tries
piece by piece to make the best things it can out of the best parts of
things that came from before it by recontextualizing them, this
library is one grand work of recontextualization. Mr. Milburn's book
inspired a jazz quartet to create a lovely dream suite that in turn
was sampled by some of the hip hop classics. Mr. Milburn's book inspired a
progressive children's television show that tried to equally celebrate
children's imaginations while also encouraging diversity as the way to
do it, rather than an obstacle in the way as Mr. Milburn seemed to
believe. Mr. Milburn's work is better for how culture already moved on
and readapted the good parts, leaving bad ones behind. So too, Mr.
Milburn's work is better as one part of a prism's rainbow in a library
where new contexts matter more than old ones.

"My father insisted on the big natural light dome and that the best
prisms came from sunlight. The best way to fight darkness in our
hearts, in our culture's past, in our family's wealth, was to shine
not just any light on it, but sunlight. My father knew full well that
the sun would over time paint its own brushstrokes of fade patterns
across the colors in the canvas below and that sort of collaboration
was something my father always trusted, and that too felt symbolic to
my father." I noticed the streaks of tears on Xavier's face, and felt
more than a little moved myself. There didn't feel like much to say in
response while I digested that. I continued to take in the sight of
the library below me and we took our time before we left the gallery
for supper.

