---
title: Some of the Surprising Complexities of Voting on Books
tags: [coding]
---

I offered to write a new voting tool for my favorite [book club]. It
seemed a good use of winter doldrums and new tools. I had several ideas
I thought would be good for the club. I wanted another, easily open source
portfolio site for [Butterfloat] and to try to show off some of the
techniques I've been concerned with in my professional life that aren't
always obvious because most of that code lives (and dies) behind closed
doors. I had a couple other pieces of technology I wanted to play with,
either to learn them better or because they were cheap new options or
both.

I got further along in this nights and weekends hobby project than I
expected I would, especially as someone who has had to explicitly take a
"no moonlighting" stance for most of my career in a needed boundary to
avoid burnout. Some of that is the new tools at my disposal. Some of
that is because this project turned out to be fun in some surprising
ways.

I've taken technical liberties in how almost everything worked, but it's
also been interesting after the major efforts were done seeking "Product
Owner approval" from the current book club admin (who is not me). I
didn't want to take over club admin, I wanted to try to work to make
this something friendly for an existing admin to work with.

## With a Little Help from My (Artificial) Friends

While I kept talking about wanting to build a cool new voting site for
my favorite book club, I was rubbing up against my own boundaries on "No
Moonlighting". As users have been starting to use and settle into the
new site, I have been making a lot of jokes that this site is especially
brought to them thanks to my Junior Developers on this project: GitHub
Copilot and Good Scotch.

This is one of the best kinds of jokes because it is surprisingly true.
There's a style of LLM coding that has been called [vibe coding]. One
January weekend I realized I had a fun vibe coding relative of my own
within this project. My Mastodon subject line (or the Welsh spelling
CWbject if you prefer) was even "[Weird Vibes (Software Engineering)]",
convergent evolution at work in describing the difference in a new
workflow. (I was not aware of "vibe coding" at the time, but now it's
such a common term.) My vibe was different from the one making the rounds
as the titular "vibe coding". That January day I realized that my vibe
was sort of distinctly "bougie" in a fun way. I realized that I'd spent
most of that coding session feeling as if I was "leaned back", in a nice
bath robe, a rocks glass of Scotch in hand, code reviewing the output of
GitHub Copilot, much more than "leaned in" and directly writing code as
I would normally be on a day job project.

I loved that vibe of leaned back, bougie code review enough that I was
immediately joking about starting a new consultancy focused entirely on
being "What if Masterpiece Theater was about Code Reviews?" I still kind
of think that would be a cool company. I don't know how much of a market
there would be for "We rent nice mahogany offices, set up a good whiskey
bar, wear cool robes and smoking jackets, and only review code, we don't
write it", but if you are an investor looking for that opportunity, hit
me up, I've got ideas.

Moonlighting has less risk of burnout when it feels like distinctly
different vibes from day job work. My current day job does pay for GitHub
Copilot on my projects, but isn't currently encouraging me to work with
a good scotch or bourbon in hand. Also most of the things I'm working on
at my day job aren't necessarily easy off the shelf algorithms and "basic
CRUD" in the same way that this hobby project has been.

## The Schulze (or "beatpath") Method and Rabbit Holes of Voting System Knowledge

A lot of us get interesting hyperfixations at various times that stick
with us. One of my college ones was getting deep in trivia of Robert's
Rules of Order, where I generated half an idea that I wanted to build a
meeting presentation tool more tuned for parliamentary procedure than
PowerPoint. (That is maybe a fun idea to revisit with LLMs, though the
ultimate crash of that project was not wanting to get into the licensing
drama of modern Robert's Rules and not expecting the tool to be that
exciting for running contemporary meetings if sticking only to the
content of Public Domain versions). Related to that one, and both a
deeper rabbit hole and maybe more important to following years, was a
deep dive into the more arcane mathematics, game theory/economics, and
software algorithms related to many of the ways it is possible to
calculate the votes of a group to find the most interesting winner.

The most common voting systems in our lives are all, in one way or
another, "first-past-the-post" systems where a simple majority winner
takes all. The very well known failure cases of those systems that are
"first-past-the-post" are what leads to common modern problems like "two
party systems" and ugly compromises like slate voting and "never vote
for a third party even if that's really what you want because that 'takes
away' votes from the next best candidate in one of the only two 'allowed'
parties".

There are lots of ways to solve this, but there's lots more ways that
feel like they solve this but are really just
"first-past-the-post-with-more-steps". Ranked choice (rank some or all
the candidates from favorite to least favorite) often give the feeling
of solving this easily, with relatively "easy" ways to assign "points"
and build point systems that do easy math in a spreadsheet. No offense
to anyone that likes to run a voting system like that or how much
interesting work has gone into running such votes and tweaking point
systems, but the ease of doing that is deceptive that in how rare it can
be for your "points" system to help solve things like let the winner be
the candidate that would win the most head-to-head battles against all
of the other candidates.

The nerdy mathematical name for this goal that head-to-head battles
matter is the [Condorcet winner criterion] and you might be surprised
how many voting systems fail this criterion. It sounds like an easy
thing to do, but it's a lot harder in practice, mathematically, than it
sounds. (Also, I would be technically remiss if I didn't point out that
the Condorcet winner criterion is not the only possible criterion to
separate a "good" voting system from a "first-pass-the-post" one, there
are several "competing" criteria that have different trade-offs. I like
the Condorcet criterion best, because it allows for "surprising" winners
but winners that most voters can still agree should have won, which is
to say it is very good at avoiding "two party systems" where there's
only two choices and the rest is "throwing your vote away" and "spoiling"
a loser's chance.)

I became one of those nerds with a favorite voting system. That system
is generally referred to as the [Schulze method], or the "beatpath"
method. (It does pass the Condorcet winner criterion.) The Schulze
method is a ranked pairs system (rank all candidates versus each other
in head-to-head battles) that mathematically accepts and flourishes with
ties so it can be *presented* as if it were a simpler ranked choice
system which allows ties. I think this is a surprisingly big deal: no
one really wants to vote for every pair of choices (think "Round Robin
tournament"), but present them a list of candidates to rank every one of
them 1-5 stars like they are writing Yelp Reviews and they can "secretly"
do all the work of doing a full pairwise ranking, with interesting ties,
and have fun doing it.

Unfortunately the Schulze method is easier demonstrated than described,
especially the math behind it. For a while there was a cool website called
[Modern Ballots], may it rest in peace, that I could point to do sample
votes. It was rather close to a "Survey Monkey to make quick Schulze
ballots". With that website gone (but obviously not forgotten) it has
gotten a lot harder again to convince people to try Schulze method
voting. The math is just hard enough that no one wants to particularly
do it by hand (I don't), and it isn't easily illustrated how to do it in
an Excel sheet or Google Sheet, either. But the math is also so juicily
easy for a simple program to automate. The meat of the Schulze method
uses a slight variation on a simple textbook algorithm called the
[Floyd-Warshall algorithm]. It is one of those algorithms you learn about
early in an undergraduate study of computing, because it also has deep
early computing roots from the time when "Dynamic Programming" meant
"solving a problem in place in its own existing data structure" rather
than something more exciting than that.

It's one of those algorithms that you may code one or two times for class
assignments and wonder if you'd ever actually need it in the real world.
It's one of those algorithms that code competitions love to include as
non-obvious solution to a word problem that then turns into a quickly
solved "known algorithm" project after you think long and hard about it.
The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is for finding the "widest path" in a
directed graph (digraph). Very simply: you've got paths from places like
A to B and A to C and C to B. These paths have numbers on them for some
reason that often is a variation of "how wide is this path" (how many
people can walk it side by side, how much money does it cost to pay the
tolls, how slow is it on a busy traffic day, all sorts of other
word problem variations like that). Is it a wider path to go directly
from A to B, or should you take the scenic route from A to C to B? These
sorts of questions are surprisingly common, so that undergraduate
implication of "you should learn this because it is handy" turns out to
be a real world thing sometimes.

The nickname for the Schulze method as the "beatpath" method comes
directly from this core reliance on the Floyd-Warshall algorithm: you
are looking for the widest path of candidates, no matter how convoluted,
who beats the most other candidates, in whatever surprising order the
graph returns. If you've encouraged a lot ties along the way, as in using
a simple, strict 1-5 "stars" choice, sometimes the widest paths are very
surprising, but in a fun way (and a Condorcet criterion way) that few can
argue with the results.

One of the reasons that this hobby project turned into "bougie vibes
coding" for me was entirely because the hardest mathematical piece of
the puzzle was very much writing a comment that I was about to use the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm adapted for the Schulze method and allowing
GitHub Copilot to spit out almost exactly the Wikipedia definition of
the Floyd-Warshall adjusted from Wikipedian pseudo-code to the language
I was actually working in with some of my coding style. I took the time
to review that it actually matched the definition and my code style, but
I was in a place to be very pleased that something I had written a bunch
of times before (as mentioned) was so easily plugged in for me here by
"my Junior Developer", Copilot. Not all programming is "use this very
well known algorithm in this rather well known use case" (I'd argue most
isn't), but it was certainly exciting to see an example play out directly
here, and code review it in a bathrobe with a good Scotch in hand.

## Passkeys Are So Nearly (Sigh) the Present

Years ago after too many near misses on database leaks and other concerns,
I made a decision that I never wanted to be in charge of storing passwords
in a database ever again. I hate passwords, personally. I especially hate
the feeling of the risk of someone's one-and-only password becoming
compromised due to my "silly fun hobby project".  I've been advocating to
get rid of them in one way or another for many years. I was a fan of the
original Blogger's friend version of OpenID and was sad to see it devolve
into related-in-name-only standards like OpenID Connect. I was a
proponent for [Mozilla Persona] and still remain disappointed it didn't
succeed. (One of my few other moonlighting projects back in the day
that's fun to compare/contrast with this book club site was one that
[used Schulze voting and Mozilla Persona]. It died when Rotten Tomatoes
shut down their public API almost exactly a year into running that site,
but if not for that it would have died soon after that when Mozilla
Persona was shutdown.)

Passkeys are the current hope for the present of "no passwords in my
database". It feels like they are ready for prime time and the mainstream,
we just need a bit more education, a bit more pomp and circumstance, a
tiny bit more polish in edge cases. It feels like we finally have a big
enough multi-vendor coalition it isn't destined to die like Mozilla
Persona did. Technically, it even feels like a slightly more polished
version of what Mozilla Persona wanted to be when it grew up (a way for
websites to get an ID directly from the user's browser with no middle
men), though it is missing some of the things that made Mozilla Persona
so nice to work with. A big one for me is that Mozilla Persona was
designed with the intent that there be an easy to verify claim of a
user's email address directly associated with the key/ID. As someone that
doesn't want to pay for a transactional email provider for my hobby
project, I would love for an email attestation on Passkeys to be something
easy to request and also to verify with a trustworthy third party. I also
understand why that's not currently in anyone's Passkey plans (and may
have played a part of why cross-vendor interest in Mozilla Persona was
so low).

This site was my first attempt to implement Passkeys as a so-called, in
security jargon, Relying Party (RP). I used an off-the-shelf library for
this called [simplewebauthn] and hit some issues where despite the name,
it did not feel as simple as I would have liked. This is partly because
simplewebauthn, to stay simple, acts mostly as a lego kit with a gnarly
pack of step-by-step instructions, including many "DIY Here" steps, and
a wave for good luck. To my benefit, I haven't been doing anything
particularly exciting or different or weird with it, and I appreciated
it as a lego kit for not constraining my choice of front-end "Frameworks"
for my front end (as I'd already made my choice, which I will get to
later in this post), even as I kept hoping for an even simpler solution.

As much as I could complain about how many headaches it gave me in the
thick of choosing it and writing the code to glue it all together and
implement it, a lot of it really was just following the lego instructions,
and a lot of that did benefit from "let Copilot write the first pass" and
then clean up its assumptions and fix things specific to my backend and
frontend choices. Not exactly the same "lean back" experience of writing
the core voting algorithm but something similar feeling to that. This was
the first big project of the application (if you can't login, how can you
vote) before even building the voting code, and a lot of the
procrastination leading into the project was not wanting to build this
code in the first place. I'm glad I got through it, and I think I did a
strong job with the strange intricacies of logging in with Passkeys and
only Passkeys, as well as the bootstrap phase to register an account's
first Passkey. I can't say it is the most secure implementation (and
given a lack of transactional email provider to actually verify emails,
it certainly isn't), but it is also possibly overkill for a "silly fun
hobby project". Yet I succeeded in not storing anything even resembling
a user password in the site's database.

Passkeys were one of my biggest anxieties in technical choices leading
into the "MVP" demo with the Product Owner. I was pleasantly surprised
at how well it demoed and the overall acceptance of it. Though I also
was lucky here that the Product Owner's background in information
security also easily agreed "oh yeah, no passwords".

I also expected a lot more user support/training issues and/or complaints
with Passkeys and have been mostly pleasantly surprised with general user
acceptance. Again here some of that is probably the luck of the bias of
this book club in question to have a somewhat tech friendly background
overall.

The biggest issue seemed to be an old (already out of security support)
version of macOS claiming to support Passkeys but failing to register a
new one in any browser using the system keychain. The workaround seemed
to be to register on a recent enough iOS device and well enough I'm told
the Mac eventually synced that key and worked with it.

The next biggest issue has been Windows 10 which is in a similar place of
"supports Passkey" but has quirks with it and only syncs with Windows
devices. I had planned for this issue, as my own main development machine
on this project is stuck with Windows 10, and so I made sure that my
implementation supported registering multiple keys for the same email
address (which I've always taken for as table stakes in Passkey
implementation, but it's interesting how some still don't).

We also found out that the "the Facebook (embedded) browser" is generally
blocked from using Passkeys and/or doesn't implement Passkey support on
every phone OS. This has been particularly frustrating because sharing
links on Facebook has been common for the book club, which has used an
FB Group as a central communications channel since it started. It's easy
to forget that not everyone distrusts the embedded browsers in platforms
like Facebook or even understands the difference between opening a link
in an embedded browser and opening the link in the system browser/their
regular and default browser. Facebook doesn't help this by moving the
"open in default browser" option strangely hard to find. (Today it's
behind an ellipsis menu. Who knows where it will move tomorrow.)

I also tried to mitigate some feedback ahead of time by suggesting
logging in with an iOS or Android device first, because those have the
subtly strongest implementations, are slightly more likely to be somewhat
up to date (given mobile OS update policies and cell carrier enforcement
of some of them), and generally the best sync behavior to their
respective ecosystems. Windows 11 can do the QR code dance to login with
an iOS or Android Passkey then help you register a Windows Passkey. Some
Linux setups can do that now, too. I got some feedback on the earliest
wording of that suggestion that I was making it sound like the website
*only* worked on iOS or Android, and I was happy to reword that and also
still feel like I'm trying to find the best way to word that advice
(without also over-explaining it, as I do here).

A lesser pet peeve I have with Passkey UX is that I’ve implemented all
the markup for the best “autofill” experiences but it doesn’t light up
and I believe the reason for that is that in most browsers it still
assumes a password field. I’ve wondered if adding a dummy password field
might help browsers show the best UX, but that seems silly for a
Passkey-only website to do and I certainly don’t want to confuse my users
with a vestigial password field that doesn’t do anything just to autofill
their email address with a cute key icon next to it. I hope the browsers
improve the UX for “no password” sites, as much as I understand why the
UX is maybe overly focused on the chicken-and-egg bootstrap dance of
upgrading sites that still use “traditional” passwords first.

Of course, some of this user acceptance feedback still feels like "early
adopter" feedback and maybe I should still brace for more pain in future
registration waves as our least technical users find time to want to vote
or we find new club members with more diversity in their technical
backgrounds. But overall I think big takeaways are beware old Passkey
implementations that only sort of work, know your workarounds for that
(allow registering the same email twice; always support multiple Passkeys
in an account), and I wish there more examples of Passkey-only sites in
the open source zeitgeist to double check implementations on. Hopefully
this implementation will be another one of use to someone else next (even
if indirectly through better GitHub Copilot vibe coding, maybe).

## Web Components with Butterfloat

I wanted another public, open source portfolio project for [Butterfloat].
I'm still quite proud of Butterfloat and I know it isn't a "Framework" on
hardly anyone else's radar (and maybe can't be because it isn't churning
through backwards compatibility breaks fast enough 😼), but one of those
things that if I build cool things with it maybe I slowly convince more
people to try it. In particular, both of the other public sites that are
open source in my portfolio were migrated from Knockout and were single
pages (though one because it was built to be single-page-application-like
and the other only because it was a small demo with no need for a second
page). This site I knew I wanted an old school multi-page app, because I
wanted to use a static site generator to build as much as possible ahead
of time. I also knew going into this project that I wanted to start from
the perspective of a ("traditional" for a static site generator [SSG])
"flat file database" of Markdown files in folders (with some modest YAML).

I've had some ideas for building an SSG with Butterfloat, but this project
didn't feel right for experimenting with those ideas. Particularly with
the desire to use the Markdown files with frontmatter paradigm. I did
have fun discovering [Lume] as a minimalist SSG with all the basics
covered that I expected and needed.

This seemed like the right project where I needed to finally test building
out Web Components with Butterfloat in a classic multi-page architecture.

Overall, I've been very excited from the results of building web
components with Butterfloat. I've mentioned many times that a guide star
for Butterfloat has been "modern Knockout" and it has been in building
these web components that I've felt some of the most like I've been
honoring the Knockout legacy. Knockout was critical in the early
"Progressive Enhancement" web, and web components, when they work well,
have a beautiful way of feeling like the endgame of Progressive
Enhancement. Simple DOM elements get replaced with more interesting things
if JS is available and as soon as it loads. That feels a lot like the best
of Knockout's experiences in the old days. Having the ability to do it
with much less of a "flash of unstyled content" is a strong improvement.
Web component elements themselves have no default content or styles and
if you place things like "noscript" warnings inside them it is a quick
matter to replace them on web component startup. Additionally, template
tags are better than what Knockout was doing with programming inside
comments and hiding things with display CSS at runtime. [Stamps]
("server-side rendering" of Butterfloat static DOM to template tags) have
been in Butterfloat for some time now, but Stamps definitely shine in the
context of web components, building template tags at “compile time” ready
for web components to pick up as soon as they are ready.

Going into building web components with Butterfloat I was worried that it
was going to be more complex and/or harder than it turned out to be. Given
some of the other web component libraries I've seen for other
“frameworks”, I expected to need a bunch of custom adapter code or things
of that nature, but I think the Butterfloat component model and lifecycle
sort of accidentally turned out to be perfect for running inside web
components and the amount of code to build a Web Component from a
Butterfloat Component seems almost too simple enough to me. I've
[documented the bones of the pattern] already and hope it helps other
projects looking for a lightweight alternative for a Web Component
"framework".

Of course, to be fair, part of why this book club site has had such a
simple time with Web Components is that I intentionally eschewed the
Shadow DOM and there's nary a Shadow Root in sight anywhere in the
project. Turns out that is something that you *can just do*. I know a lot
of Web Components tutorials and discussions get very deep into the weeds
of the Shadow DOM, and I understand why so many libraries that build Web
Components may see needs for Shadow DOM tools, but also I think a lot of
the over-focus on the Shadow DOM does injustice to how simple they are
without it, and how much you can do with Web Components that don't have
Shadow DOM. But also, I'm a fan of letting CSS do what it does best at,
at a global level across the page, because that is a lot of power and the
Shadow DOM is partly about distrusting page styles rather than taking
advantage of them. I do like to choose to take advantage of them.

Building Butterfloat components with GitHub Copilot has been fascinating.
Obviously Copilot is trained on a ton of JSX from React projects. For the
most part a lot of that just works, though stylistically it’s nice to also
update it for shortcuts Butterfloat supports that React doesn’t (like
`class` over `className`). In a couple places Copilot has been useful in
helping me find React idioms that didn’t work in Butterfloat but could
(and was quickly upgraded to support) and ones that I still intentionally
did not wish to support preferring more Butterfloat-specific idioms. This
was also a fun case of watching Copilot pick up more and more of those
Butterfloat specifics from this project as it grew and presumably also
from rich code search of my other public and open source Butterfloat
projects.

My biggest pet peeve with building these web components is that the ESM
native, properly tree-shakeable version of [RxJS] is apparently currently
trapped behind waiting for various standards organization working groups,
because the current maintainers want to wait for “Signals” and possibly
browser-native Observables proposals to shake out first. I understand the
reasoning behind that (align to standards for the next SemVer major
release), but I don’t agree with it, because we’ve been on this
merry-go-round before with standards bodies almost doing native
Observables and then giving up after lots of hemming and hawing and giant
debates. The fact that this round also includes trying to standardize
Observables-but-dumber "Signals" drama doesn’t give me a lot of confidence
that things will turn out better this time than the last time, and in the
mean time as great as esbuild is, I still would love to get real
treeshaking from RxJS (Butterfloat’s one and only dependency).

## Deno KV and Over-Engineering a Vote Engine for a Larger Scale than Necessary

For this project the backend database I chose was [Deno KV] on
[Deno Deploy]. I evaluated a lot of "serverless" deployment tools and
their various database backends. There's a lot of great options today.
There are a lot of options with interesting marketing budgets and "fan
bases". I started exploring Deno earlier when I made sure that Butterfloat
got a [good score on JSR] and found I liked a lot of the philosophy and
developer experience feel of it. (So much so I’m debating making
Butterfloat Deno and JSR-first and suggesting that over traditional npm
installs, but I’m not in a rush to do that.)

I'd pretty happily recommend Deno Deploy at this point. So far the
developer experience has been great.

Deno's Deploy product on paper seems to have fewer features that most of
the more popular/hyped options. It's primary database is "just" a "simple"
key-value store without a lot of bells or whistles like some of the hosted
SQL databases and/or "NoSQL" document databases that are "standards" in
this area.

But Deno Deploy's own focus on its documentation spoke to me. The
experiences with JSR and other parts of the Deno ecosystem have all been
pleasant and I think the Deno team seems to show a lot of maturity in how
they think about developer experiences. That focus on documentation means
their website leads relatively straight to the developer documentation,
rather than some of other hosting providers trying to steamroll you
through marketing hype after marketing hype page or blind trial sign-up
actions without first being able to read the developer document. (It also
helps that Deno Deploy seems to have a very generous free tier compared
to some of its peers.) A lot Deno's documentation alone makes up for how
relatively "young" Deno Deploy is and how many parts of it are still
appropriately and visibly labeled "experimental" or "unstable", which
shows maturity, to me at least, in how everything is documented. It's
counter-intuitive but being able to clearly see the "experimental" and
"unstable" labels helps my impression a lot. To some extent a lot of
these "serverless" hosts still feel like *most* of their products should
be labeled "experimental" or "unstable" and Deno admitting to it feels
more mature to me.

As for Deno KV, I also knew from past experience that the border between
"just" a key-value store and "a document database" is really blurry,
especially if you don't mind doing a little bit of work up front on your
"primary indexes" (your key building patterns) and rolling your own
"secondary indexes" as needed. I especially loved that Deno KV brings its
own invisible "path separator" for its key namespaces. This makes it
easier to build smart "primary indexes" while also providing tools to
avoid some of the obvious problems like key injection attacks.

There is a lot you can do with "just" a KV, especially if you are willing
to over-engineer things a bit. I’ve certainly picked up familiarity over
the years from complex usages of things like redis caches and Local
Storage.

I'm quite proud of the voting engine in this book club site. It's designed
for a massive scale that this particular club doesn't really need, but it
was exciting to write it that way, and it is also leads to more than a
bit of "penny pinching" in interesting ways to help keep the site within
Deno's current generous free tier.

In this case the Schulze method is very amenable to a classic "map/reduce"
pattern, with each ballot being mapped to an adjacency matrix describing
the "beats" graph for that user, reducing those adjacency graphs through
a simple matrix sum aggregate, then taking the last summation matrix and
mapping that through the Floyd-Warshall algorithm to arrive at the final
matrix of the widest paths of all the votes.

The voting site backend is using [Deno Queues] to orchestrate all of that
work. Additionally, the users' ballots are partitioned into (currently)
32 random buckets (but flexibly more as needed) reducing the number of
adjacency matrixes that need to be resummed when a single user votes, as
a simple complexity reduction to what we call `O(log n)`. I'm proud of
this bucketing, which is accomplished through a bit of maybe silly but
handy "primary index" magic of using for the ballot keys the reversed
string of the user's ID for the ballot. User IDs are [ULIDs] which are
timestamp up front and random entropy at the back, so reversing the ID
gives random buckets (as opposed to time insertion buckets, which is
useful in other cases for things like clustered indexes and log-oriented
appends/merges). (String reversals of these basic 32-letter alphabet ASCII
strings are also easily reversable and/or repeatable, making it still easy
to do ballot lookups by User ID.) As far as hash bucketing schemes go,
it's not a very complex one, but it works well in this case.

## "Offline First" for the MPA World

One of the things I’ve picked up from past SPAs that I’ve worked on is the
importance for designing for "offline first". Some of the applications I
worked on for past jobs *demanded* "offline first" architectures, because
if you are in the field examining some remote reach of a river, you
aren’t likely to have good cell service no matter how close we feel to
having ubiquitous cell service coverage in the US.

But the thing I found from "offline first" is that it generally "feels
better" and that it often feels like how modern apps seem that they are
supposed to feel.

All of the CRUD (create, read, update, delete) work in the voting site is
designed to be "offline first", using Local Storage generously and some
very simple "three-way merge" techniques. (CRDTs are fun, but not what I
thought was needed because ballots are intentionally single user.) This
"offline first" approach may seem especially like overkill for a
multi-page application because "the next page" isn’t likely to load when
offline, but I think people are surprised how well MPA applications get
cached and even when you are not intentionally expecting users to come to
the site while offline, the experience of becoming accidentally offline
or even just needing to "save a draft until I come back" is fantastic if
you've designed for "offline first", I think. Because offline happens
unexpectedly all the time and people often want time to draft things and
come back. In a multi-page application it especially helps to give that
"feel" of a single page application, being able to make changes in one
page and reflect them in a second, without actually being a single page
application.

(Between Butterfloat components caching well, the speedy loading of
Stamp-based components, and the fast loading from local storage of
"offline first" data I’ve even heard surprised remarks that some users
thought it was a very well optimized single-page application. I’m sure
if I add CSS view transitions that illusion will feel complete. I may add
CSS view transitions. As others are also saying, it’s a good time to start
writing MPAs again. I do recommend considering "offline first" as a useful
tool even for an MPA.)

## Takeaways and Action Items

I’m still skeptical about the long term viability of LLMs in software
engineering. It’s not going to replace most of what I do and I’m not the
sort to “vibe code” entire hobby projects (much less professional
projects) because I’m still me and saddled with a goal to over-engineer
for scale and reliability beyond the bare minimum, but hobby projects
start to be something I want to do again when I can lean back on a cold
winter’s day with a Scotch and code review some moron Junior Developer
that’s great at copypasta and Stack Overflow and Wikipedia cribbing
solutions. It makes the real engineering easier when the grunt work is
done so quickly. It’s nice to have "a team" for solo projects now. That
also helps hobby work feel more like "senior-level" work: explaining to
junior developers what to do is a good chunk of my day jobs and Copilot
takes instructions in similar (though not the same) ways.

I've got a couple wishlist items out of this project:

- I’d love for browsers to improve Passkey-only site UX
- RxJS needs a good scoring “JSR build” in 2025 and the wait for it is
  silly
- Facebook really should add a way to link to sites explicitly in the
  system's default browser, especially if OS-level Passkeys don't work
  in the embedded browser

I think there’s some useful Action Items for other projects coming out
of this one:

- Don’t underestimate the power of an MPA design in 2025
- “Progressive Enhancement” is back and better than ever with Web Components
- Try Butterfloat, it’s great and lightweight (single dependency! great DX!)
- Passkeys are here now and mostly great
- “Offline first” is great for everyone, even MPAs
- The Schulze (“beatpath”) method is a great way to vote on silly things
  like “next book to read” but also maybe serious things, and more people
  should be aware of it

[book club]: https://worldmaker.net/jocobookclub/
[Butterfloat]: https://worldmaker.net/butterfloat/
[vibe coding]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibe_coding
[Weird Vibes (Software Engineering)]: https://smeap.com/@max/113824187346382324
[Schulze method]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schulze_method
[Condorcet winner criterion]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Condorcet_winner_criterion
[Modern Ballots]: https://modernballots.com/
[Floyd-Warshall algorithm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floyd%E2%80%93Warshall_algorithm
[used Schulze voting and Mozilla Persona]: https://github.com/WorldMaker/StingerCheck/
[simplewebauthn]: https://simplewebauthn.dev/
[Lume]: https://lume.land/
[Stamps]: https://worldmaker.net/butterfloat/#/stamps
[documented the bones of the pattern]: https://worldmaker.net/butterfloat/#/guides/web-components
[RxJS]: https://rxjs.dev/
[Deno KV]: https://docs.deno.com/deploy/kv/manual/
[Deno Deploy]: https://docs.deno.com/deploy/manual/
[good score on JSR]: https://jsr.io/@worldmaker/butterfloat/score
[Deno queues]: https://docs.deno.com/deploy/kv/manual/queue_overview/
[ULIDs]: https://github.com/ulid/spec
[Mozilla Persona]: {% post_url 2014-05-26-mozilla-persona-and-owin-part-2-supporting-bearer- %}
