---
date: 2008-04-24 14:13:09.854110
db_id: 462
db_updated: 2008-04-24 14:13:09.854159
excerpt: ''
layout: post
redirect_from:
- /work/sign-pasta/1/
story_abstract: ''
story_commentary: ''
story_number: 1
story_work: sign-pasta
tags: pastafarianism
title: The Sign of the Pasta
---
"May the Great CEO bless you with full benefits, good sir," the old
cashier crone crooned as she deposited the change upon my palm.  I
pocketed it, hoping she couldn't see me subtly shaking my head as I
wandered, groceries in hand, to the lot outside.  I guess one of His
Marketing representatives must have come through *His Favored Market*
recently, once again inciting in even the lowliest and dirtiest clerk
the **Good Fortune Shared By All Whom Shall Work**.  The bright sun
belittled my meager cynicism as I came out into the lot, His minor
torment upon me, perhaps.

Three of His Lost Employees were scattered across the lot, doing what
little they could to scrape a living off the droppings of the more
fortunate, to eke change from the few that they could.  "It is their own
misfortune only because they cannot or will not work when His
Magnificent Society asks that of them," spoke the parody Marketer in my
head, looking at least a little bit like the current President, our
current head of His Earthly Affairs.  I still don't understand how
people can always be so close to such depressing desolation and not
wonder why in "His Benevolence" he can't seem to feed or clothe so many
that wander His Cities homeless and desperate.

*His Preferred Market* across the street glittered in the wonder of His
Holy Writ, proclaiming sales in produce and home appliances.  *His
Fabulous Furniture Emporium* next door letting all know the great
fortune of how His Machines have delivered unto us nearly unprecedented
savings!  Just like last week.  Just like every week...

A man of rather imposing stature made a rather whimsically meek cough
just behind my left shoulder.  "Excuse me, good sir, but do you have a
few cents for a war veteran?"  I turned slowly, letting my eyes adjust
to the surprisingly dark corner under which this man sheltered.  His
clothing was all in black, a peg leg extending from his right knee, a
patch upon his eye, and a well worn hat askew upon his head.  I did
**not** gasp, I took the sight in coolly and calmly.  Even if I did
wonder if this were some hidden agent of His Human Resources, I
concealed both my worry of arrest and any interest in squealing
ingrained from His Anti-Piratical Propaganda.

Here was my first encounter with anyone that seemed genuinely piratical,
appearing to be a true veteran of one of His Wars and wearing some of
the Forbidden Paraphernalia.  Imagine someone actually wearing anything
as obscure as a hat here in one of His Climate Controlled Zones, much
less an eye patch obscuring one's depth perception, or a wooden peg
where *His Miraculous Re-Synthesized Limb* might have grown!  This man
was asking for favor just as one of His Lost Employees and yet his looks
belied a man certainly of caliber to earn a fair wage and his clothing
fabrics belied a sense of some wealth even if somewhat worn and
weathered.  These clothes alone, even without the scars or the age in
the man's eyes, whispered tales of experience and travel.

I'm sure that he saw my curiosity in my appraisal of him.  He gave me a
few moments to gather my thoughts and reach for the change I had just
pocketed minutes earlier.  I held the few cents in my hand, outstretched
and he turned my gesture into a firm handshake, the change clattering
loudly to the parking surface below.  "Ah, I see that you are a true
gentleman and scholar in this dark age."  A smile spread between his
mustache and massive beard, bright white teeth, a cheshire spotlight of
friendliness.

He bowed, palming the change with his left hand as he raised his hat in
salute with his right.  It was then that I almost did gasp.  Beneath his
piratical helm was a glowing visage just like His Own Holy Writ: the
familiar imagery of *His Promised Pasta Platter*, only twisted into a
smiling visage, a mockery of man from sauce-covered grain and meat-like
substance.  The man's movement was swift, but even as he cocked his hat
back unto his head and stood back as if nothing had happened I could
still see an afterimage of that absurd and memorable symbol.  His placed
a kind hand upon my shoulder, "May His Noodly Appendage guide you
through another successful work week.  I've heard that the sailing
weather will be wonderful this weekend."  With that he gently pushed me
back towards the parking lot.

I couldn't help but dwell on those platitudes.  They sounded so much
like those of His Marketers, and yet that wink and that smile filled my
head with monstrous thoughts.  I could imagine him referring not to that
ineffable designer, that Great CEO of this, His Own Beloved Country, but
to that mocking mess of machine-made meal he had concealed underneath
his hat.  It was funny, could a man worship an advertisement of food?
...and yet...  and yet...  Wasn't it that the Marketers spent so much
effort explaining to us How He Manifested His Love to Us in His
Products?  Is it that much more improbable to cut out the middleman and
wonder whether the Products themselves or the Machines that made them
Loved us, without need for some Great CEO to have designed that Product
or Machine Himself?  My head was swimming...  This man of piratical garb
didn't seem crazy, but wasn't it considered crazy in the eyes of His
Human Resources Officers just to wear piratical garb?

My natural reservoir of cynicism nearly spilled out into the workplace
that week.  *I'm not just some Resource to be managed and placed on
display just like any other of His Products.*  My Supervisor nearly
trotted me out in front of a tribunal of HR Officers on trumped up
charges of dereliction of duty.  It was all I could do to conceal my
newfound nautical interest for the upcoming weekend.  I think I tripped
my Supervisor's wire attempting to be too pious to slip under the radar.
I may have let a whiff of sarcasm slip into some sentence of spiritual
sharing or it may have been just slightly out of character to suddenly
seem less reserved in sharing said moments with my coworkers who seemed
even more wildly out of the loop than ever.

The week couldn't pass quick enough, and then, not unlike a bowl of *His
Glorious Green Gazpacho*, it had passed sooner than I expected and I was
caught up in a wonderfully dreary drizzle on the docks of our dour
waterfront at my first opportunity to ditch my weekend responsibilities.
I spotted it almost immediately on arrival, a gorgeous sloop flying a
depiction of *His Promised Pasta Platter*, albeit minus that visage that
haunted my recent dreams.  I attempted to pass onto the ship, but was
stopped by a gruff mariner who prompted me for the forbidden word under
which they sheltered.  I did not know it and so, somewhat curious, I
drifted to a nearby bench to watch the crew continue with their loading
duties.

I had been there several hours, nearly having drifted to sleep and
almost convinced the parking lot pirate had been but some ghostly dream.
I was startled to by a gentle touch on my shoulder.  A glance and I was
looking up directly into the grim face of that same pirate I had
wondered had been fantasy, only now I worried what reality I might
actually be facing...  "Up, boy." A simple command, and as
anti-authoritarian as I believe myself to be, I couldn't help but obey.
He guided me back to the gangplank and we passed a similar grizzled
sailor as had barred me earlier in the day.  "Do ye vouch for this kid,
Captain?" he said as we passed.  The Captain smiled for the first time
since he had started guiding me onto the ship, "Aye, I believe we have a
new Cabin Boy."

He led me into his own quarters and set me down gently upon a simple
wooden stool.  His peg leg a haunting percussion counter to the other
notes of a ship loading and preparing to sail.  He politely doffed his
coat and hat to a stand near the door and then fiddled a with button on
his pants leg above the wooden peg.  A shimmer of rainbow light flashed
around the peg and was replaced by a boot matching his other foot.  The
tapping of wood upon wood stopped and it was just his two booted feet
upon the floor.  Finally he removed his patch, revealing an eye just as
healthy as the one beside it.

He smiled even wider and with open arms boomed, "Welcome to the
*Enlightened Eleanor* one of only a few remaining boats sailing under
that shining visage of the Smiling Spaghetti, the one true Flying
Spaghetti Monster, demon to the devout and destroyer of the divine and
describer of the devices!"

I certainly had a lot of questions, but I would be lying if I told you
that the first word out of my mouth to fill the silence was anything but
"Spaghetti?".

He sighed, "It was easier when I was your age.  The name *His Promised
Pasta Platter* replaced *His Spectacular Spaghetti Special* several
years ago when the Marketers made any use of the word 'spaghetti' taboo.
But they couldn't ban the dish itself, as there's few dishes more
American than a spaghetti dinner, and so we continue to use the imagery
even as they keep that word away from perverting the lips of young
innocent children..."

The creaks of sails could be heard as the ship began to gently move away
from the dock.

I had been wondering where my anti-authoritarian streak would kick in,
and cynicism is hard to well up against against obvious rambling,
"That's all well and good, but what use is your Spaghetti god against
the Great CEO?  They both seem like figments of someone's imagination."

He laughed and his smile broadened, "Of course my lad, you are
absolutely correct.  They are both figments of men's minds.  But ours is
a useful figment, a wonderfully chosen misdirection.  With our Flying
Spaghetti Monster we have ample opportunity to use their religion
against itself.  They can't ban much more than they already have at this
point without tearing gaping holes in their religion.  Under shield of
His, our Flying Spaghetti Monster's, Many Noodly Appendages we can do
what we can to bring Science back unto this World.  To relearn and
reteach the wonders not of His Machines, but of **our** devices, built
humanity through hard work and intelligence, not some divine diety as
the Marketers preach."

He didn't talk down to me after my earlier conclusion, I'll give him
that.  I knew the word religion, as a nearly dead word from history
books, but Science...?  He let that sink in and wandered over to the
window to watch the ship's progress.  A voice sounded from the air,
"Captain, we have cleared the proscribed No Wake Zone.  Permission to
start the engines, sir."

The Captain replied to the window, "Granted, Commander Root.  Proceed
with due caution."  A low, dull thundering began to fill the resulting
silence and the ship began obviously to accelerate faster than the sails
had been providing.  The Captain turned back toward me and then tapped
his boot upon the floor, "Do you hear that?  That is Science at work!
Simple controlled explosions pushing moving pistons that in turn push
water which causes an equal and opposite force to push the boat in the
opposite direction!  Simple chains of cause and effect, action and
reaction, day in and day out.  Science is what the world *is*, and the
Marketers can't reach you here to stop you from learning...  Excited?"

I couldn't help but be swept up in the Captain's own excitement.  He
pointed to his foot that had appeared to have been damaged, "Push light
the right way and you can get people to see things that aren't even
there.  Sound waves are even easier to push around."  He pointed to the
eye patch, "Auxiliary display; changes several forms of light and data
that aren't visible to the human eye and pushes them out as light that
is visible.  That's my toy as Captain, but I'll give you this one chance
to play, put it on boy!"

I did as he said and at first was disoriented.  Rather than seeing
nothing at all I saw the Captain's Quarters and tiny tags on things of
interest and swirling depths of distances as my eye moved across the
view in the patch.  It was wild and amazing.  After a few minutes I
removed it, dizzy and somewhat out of breath.

"It's all explanatory.  There are answers to questions you've only
dreamed of asking, for the fear those damned religious zealots burned
into your head.  But we'll make a Scientist out of you, my boy!  You'll
probably surpass all of our knowledge before long, if you take to it
like I think you will."

Then his grin faltered.  His early serious expression returned to haunt
his face, age lines grooved into his skin darkening and clouding.  "You
will of course, have to earn it.  For all of their faults the Marketers
are correct that right now in this world there is no such thing as a
free lunch.  Don't worry about that tonight, I want you to get a good
rest tonight and tomorrow we'll discuss your employ and how you'll be
earning your keep.  We'll also get you started on making your own first
set of clothes..."

He took a deep breath, glanced to his wrist, pressed at a part of his
cuff and then ushered me out of his door without another word.  My mind
was obviously swimming even more than following my previous encounter
with the Captain.  But I was in swimming in Love.  Did this Flying
Spaghetti Monster really herald such a cache of knowledge in this
forsaken world?  Just the anticipation of "making" my own clothes...
apparently it is a power available to the common man and not solely
reserved for His Holy Machines to build and then tagged with insipid
names like *His Perfectly Pretentious Pleated Pants* by some equally
insipid Marketer...

I'll wake tomorrow in an entirely different world and I can't wait.

.. admonition:: If Science is Outlawed, Only the Outlaws will Science...

   All in good fun...  No offense to actual people in marketing or human
   resources, anywhere.  

   This story has been stewing in my head for some time.  I've long
   joked about the religious nature of 20th Century American Corporate
   Dogma and with an ID "Great CEO in the Sky" it mushed into a perfect
   fit in a struggle with Pastafarianism.  "There is no 'i' in Team."
   and all that...
   
   FSM/Pastafarianism is all about trying to teach lessons of humility
   to those that sometimes passionately refuse to listen, and maybe this
   story pushes a few buttons.  If it does, great, let's start a dialog.
   Keep in mind that 'humility' is a relative of 'humor' and 'Humanity',
   though.
   
   By the way, I do think we need more Pirate Scientists spreading
   knowledge across the high seas, and combating global warming with
   their general coolness...
