---
date: 2009-09-23 19:15:38.896397
db_id: 545
db_updated: 2009-09-23 19:19:42.617217
layout: post
tags: coding facebook appengine
title: Textapp
---
Here's another *Assassins!* derivative, albeit one a tad bit dirtier and
less "your application ready": the boringly named ``textapp``. This is
the guts to my all-inclusive text messaging dispatch for App Engine. It
has handlers to accept both Facebook's SMS requests and App Engine's
XMPP-based IM requests.

Because I was feeling too lazy to set up something friendlier (to me)
like "darcsit" or my own django+darcs solution, I've posted the `current
version of textapp.py on github's gist`__. It depends on my `webappfb.py`_.

__ http://gist.github.com/192277
.. _webappfb.py: http://blog.worldmaker.net/2009/sep/22/facebook-google-appengine-webapp-framework/

I think that as it stands right now ``textapp`` cross-cuts too many
concerns to be immediately appropriate to any project I might donate it,
and it isn't "big enough" to merit its own project right now. However, I
do think it might be useful for interested people.

First of all, it is a bit dirty: you'll notice that it makes reference
to my domain model named ``Player``. The only important detail for
``textapp`` is that this model does my Facebook ``uid`` to XMPP ``jid``
mapping (with some authorization magic, of course). There is also no
localization, yet. (I've been wondering for a few weeks now how soon I
should start on Assassins' l10n plans, partly because I want support for
Pirate, which is my preferred Facebook language.)

High level there are three important parts: RegEx-based dispatcher,
Message classes, and request handlers.

The request handlers you simply provide a callback (as ``application``)
and plug into the appropriate places: your main handler (``/``, most
likely) for ``FacebookSmsHandler`` and the App Engine XMPP handler
(``/_ah/xmpp/message/chat/``) ``FacebookXmppHandler``. You'll also want
to handle the ``canvas()`` function for ``FacebookSmsHandler``, as that
does double as your application's "front page". These are normal
``webapp`` request handlers and should be wired accordingly.

The message classes are populated by the above handlers:
``FacebookSmsMessage`` and ``FacebookXmppMessage``. Both message classes
provide the same interface and for the most part handlers don't need to
worry which one is which. (Both are based on App Engine's
``xmpp.Message`` class.)

The dispatcher ``TextApplication`` is a simple RegEx to handler mapping
class that should be familiar to most Python web framework users.
RegExes are tried in listed order, attempting to parse the message body.
The message and passing RegEx groups as keyword arguments or positional
arguments (depending on whether or not your RegEx uses named groups).
Handlers can be be functions or classes in the usual Pythonic "callback"
fashion.

.. vim: ai spell tw=72
