---
date: 2009-03-31 16:42:39.828295
db_id: 526
db_updated: 2009-03-31 16:42:39.828342
layout: post
tags: game-design games world-design
title: All Around Us Are Shared Worlds
---
It's one of those gray Floridian days where you feel like just curling
up with a book, here on my "working" vacation. [1]_ Today I got a bit of
an earlier start than I might intend on such a gray day and have been
working my way through *Inside Straight*, a Wild Cards mosaic novel. I
got a paperback copy of the book out of LibraryThing_'s Early Review
program [2]_, so I've got a review promised that you can expect to
appear on this blog, but consider this a midway warmup to that review.
I'm going to apply some of my thoughts on the novel to some of my recent
ruminations about game and world design, so this post isn't exactly a
review anyway.

.. _LibraryThing: http://www.librarything.com/

I have a huge interest in shared worlds and Wild Cards is a shared world
that I've spent a reasonable amount of time in. Wild Cards is a shared
world series that is only a few years younger than I am and at this
point encompasses 18 volumes, the shared effort of over a dozen writers
and the steady editorship of George R. R. Martin, now perhaps better
known for his high fantasy series. The basic premise is a world with
super-powers (due to an alien virus referred to as the "wild card
virus"). It's a (sometimes quite dark) funhouse mirror of our own
history, but filled with heroes ("aces"), villains, a deformed
under-class ("jokers"), plague deaths ("black queens"), assassinations
and alien invasions. 

The series has some of the seriousness in tone and literacy of the
post-*Watchmen* era of comics, as if perhaps reading novelized excerpts
from some post-modern comic canon. As much as it speaks of our own
history, it possibly has more to say as what might pass for a broad
comics continuity such as Marvel or DC's had one been established in the
same time period with a copy of *Watchmen* in hand, smuggled back in
time...

I think games have a lot to learn about world sharing, [3]_ and things
like comics and Wild Cards probably have a lot more to teach than game
designers may yet figure. Had *Inside Straight* crossed in front of my
view prior to January's Round Table on designing games from literary
sources, I probably would have used it or one of its predecessors. I'm
still tempted to play with ideas for a "Wild Cards game" as a design
exercise. [4]_

I arrived at a good thesis on what and why this learning should happen,
and realized it was a deep, dark undercurrent of the stuff I've been
reading from the Round Table crowd (and `Corvus Elrod`_ himself has
embedded into his definitions of game, story, and play), but is
certainly my own personal take on the subject: **All games are shared
worlds.** I'm thinking it may be the best elevator pitch for my beliefs
and interests in gaming storytelling that I've yet come up with.

.. _Corvus Elrod: http://corvus.zakelro.com

As with others, I'm more and more of the opinion that our culture's deep
copyright-enforced moating of story worlds is no less than a very toxic
mistake. The last few decades worth of corporate-backed copyright
extensions have nearly lost us our senses of sharing in storytelling.
The litigious bullies that fight to keep others out of their sandboxes
and others from playing with their toys, serve only to pour salt on our
cultures wounds. [5]_  Fan fiction isn't evil or bad and it certainly
isn't a "lesser commodity" or "second-tier product"; it is nothing more
or less than our cultural birthright to share each other's words and to
share each other's worlds.

If there is a medium to ask us to requestion our cultural beliefs about
the place and the presence of deeply, culturally, shared worlds it
should and can be gaming. To some extent it already has; more and more
it becomes obvious that players are as much partners in storytelling as
a game's creators. Certainly some designers/writers for single player
games are dragging their heels, but all they need to do is take a look
at MMOs or some of the designers/writers that *do* get it.

Just imagine what might happen if Activision Blizzard were to decide to
"enforce their copyright" and send cease and desist letters to *World of
Warcraft* "fan fiction" writers? George Lucas certainly has had many
cases of getting away with only minor scratches after such attacks from
his legal dogs, but Activision Blizzard would attack the very sorts of
"alpha players" that make WoW's community successful, and keep people
paying the monthly payments. How long do you think it might take for a
good portion of the player base to move on to their next MMO? We already
have statistics confirming that entire guilds can and do move between
MMOs due to the considerations of strong guild leaders.

But it's deeper than that, too. All games are shared worlds. Not just
the basic sharing of the talking stick between designer/writer and
player, but also the sharing between designer/writer and the physics
programmer, the art director, the AI director, the pre-release hype
community, and myriad other people and/or job hats, and then in turn
that sharing further amplified by player interactions and media
interactions/special features.

I think that gaming will truly come into its own in doing things that
currently no other media is doing, or possibly can do, the moment it
starts to not just casually allow the shared world culture of games, but
to truly embrace it.

Skeptics in the "games as art" debate ask where is gaming's Charles
Dickens or Orson Welles. I think gaming might be better off asking: where
is gaming's George R. R. Martin? It's one thing to present neat worlds
and give players sandboxes to explore. It's yet another thing to stitch
those stories into a single self-contained tapestry that both defines
what came before and sets up the prompt for the next iteration.

It certainly didn't come as a surprise that the original inspiration for
Wild Cards, according to the Wikipedia, was a pen and paper RPG.

I've got a bunch of other words on the subject matter, but this many
words into a post I'm feeling lazy and don't feel like highlighting
specific examples. Hopefully the tags on this post should lead you to
few past examples.

----

.. [1] As a currently self-employed misfit, any vacation with WiFi
   access and a handy laptop is a working vacation. For instance, this
   blog post is work of a sort. Exciting for me, and probably boring to
   just about anyone else, on Sunday I got it into my head to go ahead
   and transcribe a couple of documents into a very simple tab-delimited
   "animation script". In the subsequent work fuque I then wrote up a
   very simple Python script to convert from my animation script to a C#
   partial class that I'll plug in to my build when I get back home. I'm
   hoping that when I wire up the animation script that it will provide
   a neat attract mode/tutorial, and possibly also a good trial
   experience (should I self-publish to XBLCG with the timed trial
   requirement).

.. [2] Albeit this is a "late review" in that the book was released last
   year by Tor, but with a second novel just out and a third out soon
   they seem to be trying to re-promote the series. It certainly jumped
   out at me in the Early Review list.

.. [3] Which should probably be a recognizable recurring theme in my
   posts.

.. [4] Or at least maybe write some short fiction of my own in the
   setting...

.. [5] Yes, I'm talking about you George Lucas and Orson Scott Card,
   among so many, many others.

.. vim: ai spell tw=72