---
date: 2009-10-19 19:04:27.514016
db_id: 548
db_updated: 2009-10-19 19:05:51.565375
layout: post
tags: games game-design round-table
title: 'Blogs of the Round Table: The Ending Has Not Yet Been Written'
---
=============================================================
Blogs of the Round Table: The Ending Has Not Yet Been Written
=============================================================

October's topic is on the subject of the denouement in gaming. Already
the round table has provided somewhat clear calls to action that more
and better denouements are needed in games, and provided good examples
of both good and bad denouements. As is my temperament, I'm inclined to
play devil's advocate and provide voice to the underrepresented
sides of the argument (regardless to my own opinions on the deeper
subject matter). On this matter I've decided to discuss whether or not
the traditional story-telling arc's resolution/denouement applies to
games at all...

  The ending has not yet been written.

You probably don't need much help from me to hear those words in a
specific voice from a specific game introduction. Sometimes this
sentence fragment from *Myst* is a cliche and sometimes this sentence
fragment is a mantra. Given the *Myst* game was an experiment, a baby
step towards richer storytelling by a company that had developed up to
that point talent in ambience and worldbuilding, but not storytelling, I
can't help but think of that line as `lampshade hanging`_ as well.

*Myst*, arguably, left the majority of its resolution to its sequels and
books. Much of the interpretation and larger storytelling of *Myst* is
delegated to the player, and thus to communal storytellers spread across
fora and mailing lists.

It is certainly easy to describe this as the norm for storytelling in
games. The *Halo* series barely has patience to provide useful briefings
to players, it shouldn't come as a surprising that it basically skips
debriefings. The games survive on the pace of the action and the pretty
scenery is rarely more evocative than "pretty" for most players. There
are, however, those people that seek out the written fiction that flesh
out the story and along with the sequels provide some sense of
resolution, to those that need it.

In terms of worldbuilding: a true, literary denouement, whether it is
playable or not, may in fact be counter-productive. If the point is to
build a mysterious land full of questions, resolving most of them in a
straightforward manner by game's end may kill the mystery or the wonder.
I would imagine that inhabitants in a mysterious world rarely get
straightforward resolution of their actions. 

To be blunt, the sense for a need of resolution can sell books and can
sell future games. But far be it from being a purely capitalist
statement, because "sell" isn't always the correct verb. When done well,
worldbuilding invites players to homestead and potentially become fans.
Fans will continue to repudiate that they are the true storytellers in
games, will continue to tell their own stories set in the game world
they engaged with.

Is it possible that for games, almost uniquely, the
resolution/denouement is the realm of the fan?

.. _lampshade hanging: http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/LampshadeHanging

.. raw:: html

   <p style="text-align: center;">For other possible endings:<br /> <iframe marginheight="8" marginwidth="8" title="Round
   Table"
   src="http://blog.pjsattic.com/roundtable.php?rtMON=1009&amp;bgcolor=303030"
   frameborder="0" height="64" scrolling="no" width="256">Please visit
   the Round Table&#8217;s <a title="Round Table Main Hall"
   href="http://blog.pjsattic.com/corvus/round-table/">Main Hall</a> for links to all entries.</iframe></p>

.. vim: ai spell tw=72