---
date: 2009-09-28 23:17:25.134373
db_id: 547
db_updated: 2009-09-28 23:17:25.134423
layout: post
tags: games game-design round-table
title: 'Blogs of the Round Table: Spatio-Temporal Navigation'
---
====================================================
Blogs of the Round Table: Spatio-temporal Navigation
====================================================

.. admonition:: September's Topic

   Isn't that spatial?

I was at first apprehensive that my base assertion for this month's
round table was perhaps a bit of a stretch given the open topic, but my
motive is to push into a larger topic, whose larger, crazier assertion I
will bury at the end of this post.

However, I'm thankful that a few of this month's contributors have
wonderfully set the stage for my assertion this month: the only
mechanisms that games have to explore the temporal aspects of games are
spatial in nature. The course of "time" across a game is indelibly
intertwined with the traversal of space.

Narrative influences affect the space of game. More often than not this
can be seen as opening up new spaces to explore, or providing new
reasons to re-explore existing spaces in new forms. (In the easy case,
as most FPS games provide, the narrative and space are integrally
intertwined and in fact the current design strategy of choice for FPSes
is that the spaces themselves should tell the story. I don't think it is
far to extrapolate from the FPS to more complicated narrative forms that
there still exists a deep, inherent connection between the spaces of the
game and the narrative of the game.)

It is increasingly rare that players are not offered maps, guides, and
various sorts of route finders across the standard two and three
dimensions of spatial travel. I find it fascinating that there are very
few similar tools for mapping a player's path through narrative spaces
and world configurations. At this point the sole tool at the disposal of
the player, in most games, for both narrative mapping and narrative
traversal is the venerable, but aging "save game".

In terms of tracing a player's progression through a game's narrative
space, save games are rarely more than basic breadcrumbs. As much as
games hand-hold players in two and three space, it is fascinating that
in some genres save game-based breadcrumb skills are still what
separates a good player from a great player.

The only games that I can think of that have kindly provided maps in the
direction of the narrative are the Capcom games *Shadow of Destiny* and
*Dead Rising*. Of course, both of those games needed maps for their
narratives: *Dead Rising* ties its narrative events to real time and
*Shadow of Destiny* has time-travel as an important element.

Certainly, I don't think complicated narratives or complicated real
timings are the only reasons to map, or better yet provide navigation
tools for, the narrative dimensions of a game. I think there is a lot of
good room left for experimentation and exploration in spatio-temporal
navigation. Walkthroughs are are cheap tourist maps from fellow
tourists, and to "kill" them requires at least some experimentation here.

Other than questions about achievements, the only reason I turned to a
walkthrough during *Fable 2* was to check for navigation markers to
explore alternate narrative paths. (Most of which were obvious in the
Fable dichotomy-verse, but still...) *Fable 2* was interesting in that
it doesn't seem to allow you to clone your save games, to experiment
in some of the boring, standard ways that even boring old save games
normally allow.

I wondered why the game wouldn't (or couldn't) tell me which options I
had already tried, which quests I had previously tried (or not) in my
"past lives" on my account. I had similar thoughts when playing *Mass
Effect*, whose huge discussion trees really beg for signs to let you
know which of the vast many choices you've seen before. BioWare is
content to let the majority of players see only a hair-thin line of the
breadth of the amount of writing and voice work (etc...) that exists in
their games. I, for one, would be interested in providing tools to
experiment in that breadth, to navigate that breadth.

Here's the bombshell to think about, and which I plan to return to:
whether or not you subscribe to the many worlds interpretation of
quantum mechanics, it absolutely applies to videogames. Videogames are
multiverses unto themselves, and navigation is but one issue in these
larger spaces that can be experimented with.

.. raw:: html

   <p style="text-align: center;">For other challenges in the face of
   space:<br /> <iframe marginheight="8" marginwidth="8" title="Round
   Table"
   src="http://blog.pjsattic.com/roundtable.php?rtMON=0909&amp;bgcolor=303030"
   frameborder="0" height="64" scrolling="no" width="256">Please visit
   the Round Table&#8217;s <a title="Round Table Main Hall"
   href="http://blog.pjsattic.com/corvus/round-table/">Main Hall</a> for links to all entries.</iframe></p>

.. vim: ai spell tw=72