---
date: 2010-05-17 17:08:20.680570
db_id: 567
db_updated: 2010-05-17 17:08:20.680604
layout: post
tags: games game-design scriptfrenzy
title: A Preview for A Robot Fugue
---
I felt it was time to formally introduce my grand writing project of the
last few months on my blog. I have been working on a game script about
robots that I only recently began to title *A Robot Fugue*. (That may
eventually be demoted to a sub-title, but its much better than the last
working title, "Untitled Robot Game".)

This project was the one I used for `Script Frenzy`_, and I brought the
current script to the 100 pages required to declare a win! I did cheat,
just a little, but I won. The biggest cheat is that a certain bulk of
the current script is taken in describing a maze that I'm still not sure
will fit into the final game.

.. _Script Frenzy: http://www.scriptfrenzy.org

So far I feel like I've finished only one of the game's planned six
acts. By finished, I mean the act is fully playable and gets most of the
(highly expository) points I wanted to get across, but I'm sure it still
needs more polish/play-testing. I've got bits and pieces scattered
across the other five acts, including the aforementioned maze which may
or may not be a puzzle in the game.

In the game, the player takes on the role of a robot named Pov given the
choice between a voluntary upgrade and a possibly mandatory
deactivation. I've ended up with what I feel to be a very interesting
backstory to the game. The world of the game has nearly a century of
robotics leading into the alternate 1980s in which it is set.

The title *A Robot Fugue* has some interesting connotations. Outside of
music, a fugue is denoted as "a dream-like state". Certainly, I think
this applies to the game at many levels. There is also a negative
implication in modern usage of the term, and although I try to keep the
game mostly light-hearted, the core themes are pretty "heavy".

Perhaps more interestingly, a fugue in music is associated as a
particularly format where a theme is explored in repetition (and light
variation) in a traditional 3-part structure. As with most good robot
literature, the game is an exploration on the theme of control and
authority. There is quite a bit of narrative repetition on that theme,
particularly in bringing in the biases of multiple characters. Further
more, there is also the implicit repetition I'm encouraging in the
game's narrative form itself.

As far as I know, there isn't a name yet for the narrative form I'm
attempting, but fugue sounds like a good candidate. I'm planning a
branching three-act structure whereby there are six acts in total and
four main paths through the game (simpler to describe graphically, but
it's a very simple tree with a single intro branching into two acts
branching into three acts). To see 100% of the game, you will need
multiple playthroughs. I'm hoping that the game will be reasonably short
enough that it won't be a grind for completists, and I'm trying to
scatter enough interesting details amongst the edges to make it worth it
to those who aren't necessarily completists...

It is a complex writing project. I'm happy with what I've completed thus
far, but there is certainly still more to write. It helps that the
backstory keeps getting deeper for me, but then that's always been my
interest.

Below I've decided to present a tangent from the backstory that I felt
needed writing and might make an interesting preview of sorts. Of the
backstory pieces I've written, this one is the least directly related to
the game itself.  Although it perhaps touches the most on the actual
themes of the game.  It's also interesting because it took several
attempts before I was happy with it. I think some of the best parts of
the script happen when I best explore the particular biases of the
characters, and after an attempt writing half of this as an interview
transcript, I realized that it was time for a new character and a new
bias to explore.

Hopefully it works. Rest assured that the character's bias is not my
own, and that I do not condone the use of anti-robot slurs, but have
left them as written "by the character".

----

*National Robotic Magazine feels it important to provide dissenting
opinions. Last month's interview on the Steel Rebellion generated some
controversy amongst sections of our readership. We've asked Dr. Cameron
Crawford, a Professor of History and self-described "Robot Skeptic", to
provide his perspective.*

Of course we all remember the legacy of John Henry. John Henry probably
wasn't the first, and definitely has not been the last, man to challenge
a robot, but John Henry will forever be the patron of the humanist and
the luddite both. John Henry challenged that steel-driving machine,
fought hard and won the struggle, even if it cost him his life.

Nearly a century later, the *National Robotic*'s esteemed "expert",
Robot Pyschologist Calivina Suza, has decided to throw the legacy of
John Henry into spin (as well as desecrate the names of many deceased
journalists and members of our legislature) all in a publicity stunt to
gain support for *National Robotic*'s silly pet project--- The Museum of
Robotics.

Although the interview is still fresh in many of our minds this month,
pardon me as I retell this unique new history of the Steel Rebellion
that Dr. Suza would have us believe: **the** robot leader of the
Rebellion has been in storage at GSD for nearly a century. This Mark I
unit, designated by Dr. Suza as "Hardsteel", not only lead the
Rebellion, but in fact was the very same robot that battled John Henry
on that fateful day! As if that were not wild enough, it turns out that
Hardsteel believes that it *let John Henry win*, against its own orders,
and this act was in fact the first event in what we now refer to as the
Steel Rebellion.

Dr. Suza, and presumably many others on the staff at *National Robotic*
[ED: *National Robotic*'s official policy decision on Dr. Suza's recent
research can be found elsewhere in this issue.], would have us believe
that John Henry himself is the secret martyr of the so-called free robot
and a direct instigator of the Steel Rebellion, history's largest robot
uprising. That the robots were driven by their response to John Henry's
passion and determination. That they took John Henry's ideas about fair
wages and applied those ideas to themselves. That any work that had
value enough for a man to die for was work that they themselves should
receive some recompense for. Certainly none of that seems to agree with
history's view of events or of the man John Henry.

Dr. Suza asserts that a robot will never lie. Certainly all of us have
come to know the skills at equivocation that all robots seem to
inherently possess. We have all seen that robots have a very interesting
way of walking around the truth, when they need to. However, if what Dr.
Suza says is true and Hardsteel is the rebellious leader she claims,
surely it is possible that such a dangerous machine might **lie**.

This Hardsteel would have us believe that the pro-human, pro-living-wage
ideals of John Henry gave it pause, and that consideration led to, of
all things, a peaceful attempt at *unionization*.  History, of course,
appears to disagree on this point: the numerous newspaper articles on
death and violence during the Rebellion certainly provide plenty of
evidence to the contrary.

Of course, Dr. Suza would white-wash all of that as "yellow journalism".
Unlike Dr. Suza, I have directly spoken with the few survivors of Steel
Rebellion riots and revolts and I have extensively researched the
subject. You can, of course, pick up your own copy of my book *Machines
Lacking Proper Authority: The Impact of the Steel Rebellion on the
American Psyche and the Advent of Modern Robot Licensing* if you wish to
know more of the subject.

Disregarding, for the sake of argument, such evidence as I believe is
also clearly established in my book, there is still the curious question
of whom such yellow journalism would have benefited. Is it the few
meager competitors of GSD at that time, none of which exist today? Is it
GSD in some mad ill-considered conspiracy to nearly destroy their own
industry, or at least *just* the public's faith in their products?
Certainly fear and destruction alone can sell newspapers, but is that
enough of a reason for what Dr. Suza and Hardsteel tell us are years of
fabrications and exaggerations?

Dr. Suza and *National Robotic* would have us believe that much of the
real truth of an event nearly a century ago can be solved simply by
*asking the right robot*. Furthered by the odd incongruity of the fact
that they claim this very right robot just happened to have been donated
to the nascent Museum of Robotics in San Francisco by a generous
donation of GSD. Even with Dr. Suza's complicated relationship with GSD,
I find this an interesting stretch of the imagination. Perhaps the
mysterious storage archives of GSD from whence this supposed
revolutionary came might include other legendary robots we should be
made aware of. Of course, the timing of this discovery is so incredibly
convenient given the upcoming grand opening of the Museum. I'm *sure*
the National Robotic Society must be as surprised as the rest of us how
this has affected their last minute donations towards the completion of
the Museum.

I feel that we need more proof of the identity and the history of this
robot, particularly if the Museum really expects to activate this Mark I
robot under security measures much more relaxed than current laws allow.
Certainly such laws were put into place for very good, very real reasons
following the Steel Rebellion. I don't think that we should forget that.
I don't think that such a strict, defining law, which caused so much
debate, was merely a delusion of its legislators.

I especially don't think that the unverified ramblings of a briefly
reactivated century-old robot should be the source of our reassurance
against the possibility that the perhaps inevitable sequel to the Steel
Rebellion might be fomented inside this Museum that Dr. Suza and
*National Robotic* are so keen on finishing. (Particularly if Dr. Suza
is correct and this Mark I is indeed the legendary Hardsteel! That seems
to me like more reason to refrain from further activations of this
unit.)

.. vim: ai spell tw=72