---
date: 2010-11-08 21:37:30.617108
db_id: 579
db_updated: 2010-11-08 21:37:30.617133
layout: post
tags: games kinect
title: Kinect Early Impressions
---
I was skeptical, even as I felt inclined to buy it, of the Kinect.
Having missed PAX this year, I missed my biggest and best opportunity to
try it before I bought it. It may have been best that way. A few moments
into using my Kinect on Friday and I experienced one of those
wonderfully personal moments of future shock that I'm not sure I would
have experienced that amidst a crowd.

I texted via XBL [1]_ to my brother that the future as promised by
science fiction staples like *Minority Report* and *Star Trek* has
arrived so that we can use it for such banal purposes as playing
minigames and controlling our ESPN viewing... Hyperbole aside, I do
think that the convergence of hardware and software in the Kinect as a
consumer device and a "toy" are well-timed baby steps towards whatever
the future of human-computer interaction is shaping up to be.

I know that other people have felt similar shock at touch and multitouch
devices like the Surface and the iPhone/iPad, and I know that other
people have felt similar shock at the Wii's early motion control. I've
been trying to peg down why those felt mundane when I first tried them
and yet Kinect continues to feel like "magic". I know as much as the
technical details of the Kinect as I do the aforementioned technologies,
and so I think the answer must lie in the combination and the gestalt of
several technologies together for the first time.

When the Kinect is "firing on all cylinders", it is a brilliant thing
indeed. Certainly it is not perfect and there are many places where it
can be bettered (and presumably will be through continuous software
improvement over the next few years), but there seems to be quite a bit
of promise in the cheeky Johnny 5--impersonator. [2]_

If I had to choose one particular thing that particularly impresses me,
it is the facial recognition. When it works, and it works even better
after a few minutes of training for the "Kinect ID", it is an amazing
thing. The ability to sign in with just your face is pretty awesome, but
where it shines is in "hop in/hop out" gaming.

I had an interesting debate on secrets hiding with respect to the iPad,
and after that discussion I really want to try writing (or at least
playing) a game that uses the facial recognition to "enforce" hot-seat
board game secret sharing... (It would need some sort of override
password for those rare times when facial recognition doesn't match, but
would still probably be interesting.)

Kinect versus Windows
=====================

The more that I interact with the Kinect, the more I want to also play
with it (or a brother of it) on my Windows PC. Considering that the
Kinect is a USB device and that most of the other Xbox 360 USB devices
have slowly gained official devices I don't think it is a stretch to
imagine that many people at Microsoft have already discussed just this.

One of the things that I find interesting is that so many of the
individual component technologies have already been in Windows for some
time, albeit underutilized. Out of the box, Windows 7 has support for
multi-touch and speech recognition and can already support many of the
UI patterns that work for "Kinect hovering". It is an interesting thing,
in fact, that we don't see more uses of these built-in Windows tools,
and more explorations of them as user interaction tools.

As someone with tablet envy some days, I continue to debate the merits
of purchasing a multi-touch monitor for my desktop, or a standalone
Windows tablet. It still surprises me how many people don't know that
Windows supports touch input (much less how long that support has been
available).

Speech recognition is the definitive tale of underutilized Windows
feature. It has been built-in to Windows since XP (with free versions
for several versions previous to XP), and has supported everything the
Kinect speech rec does, plus more. How many people do you think have
tried it? (For the curious ``Control Panel -> Ease of Access -> Speech
Recognition`` in Windows 7.)

The big thing that separates the Kinect and most desktop speech
recognition is that the Kinect's microphone is an "array microphone" and
most computers do not ship with one and few people sell them. Windows
Vista's speech recognition wizard suggested purchasing an array
microphone, and I believe that at one point Microsoft tried suggesting
them to OEMs to sell computers with them.

There is an obvious and funny little pattern that follows: If people had
array microphones on their computers they would use speech recognition
more. But because "nobody" uses speech recognition, manufacturers don't
see why they should sell expensive array microphones on their systems.
In the end, Windows' speech recognition has been relegated to "just a
toy", because consumers don't buy (and don't know to buy, and sometimes
do not have access to buy) array microphones. Windows' Speech
Recognition itself doesn't see some of the priority it needs to get
better, because users aren't using.

The Kinect is a genius [3]_ departure from the usual rules in this ugly
feedback cycle. By focusing on being a "toy" first and foremost, the
Kinect is putting front and center, and in **people's living rooms**,
just the sorts of specialty hardware that Windows *wishes* it could put
on people's desktops.

I've heard it said before that the Xbox 360 has been great for Microsoft
because it acts as a clean, proprietary slate for Microsoft to research
future Windows UI improvements. I think this is **even more** the case
with the Kinect. The Kinect is quite possibly the best HCI research lab
in a box that has yet to be deployed commercially. For now we shall be
glad and happy to put it to its banal entertainment uses, but I for one
plan to watch excitedly as people begin to grasp that whatever it is
that we've started here: it is *more* than just a toy. I am going to
play my role as rat in this new research maze, because that will fun. I
am also looking forward to whatever roles as researcher I can take.

Converge the UIs!
=================

So, this is obviously research in progress. I think nowhere is this more
apparent than in the sometimes odd sub-contexts of the Kinect Hub and
Kinect Guide. It seems unfortunate that in this first release the Xbox
team was unable to provide the same user interface/experience regardless
of whether you were Kinect hand/speak-waving through it or controller
waggling at it.

First of all, I think the Kinect Guide (which you pull up by flag
semaphoring a "G" for "Guide" to the Kinect) is actually superior to the
current home "blade" of the modern Guide, and almost reminiscent of the
old home (Xbox Live) "blade" on the original firmware dashboard (for
those that remember that). A controller would not have to much
difficulty waggling over it, but it violates the current pivot control
of the Guide's blades by making use of both directions. Some other pivot
would be needed, but is already needed given the fact that the Kinect
Guide is lacking much of the Xbox Guide's tools as it is.

I would almost welcome an option to try using the Kinect Guide as a new
default for my controllers, with some mechanism such as a double-tap to
revisit the more featureful Xbox Guide.

On the other hand, the Kinect Hub is a weird cousin to the current Xbox
dashboard. Lacking a pivot control that is anything like the
dashboard's, the Kinect Hub seems content to just provide a hodge-podge
of items from across the dashboard's pivots, spread out in a couple of
rows of tiles. There don't appear any visible differences between the
latest less-3D dashboard update's tiles and the Kinect's tiles, and yet
one responds to hand-waving and provides voice prompts while the other
does not. At this point the distinction seems arbitrary and useless.

It seems like Microsoft is just a stone's throw from a truly useful
convergence of its "dashboard" UIs: at this point Media Center, Xbox,
Kinect, and Windows Phone 7 all seem to share similar concepts of pivots
and tiles. There just weirdly seem to be so many subtle differences
between the various approaches, and having three of the four accessible
on an Xbox 360 seems particularly like a silly kick in the pants.

It is possible that the touch, controller, and hand-waving are too
disparate to bridge into a single UI structure, but I'd be surprised if
that were the case. Again, it seems that Microsoft is *so* close to
establishing a great design pattern and useful UI across all of these
disparate input systems and use cases. I hope that the current
differences are much more a matter of coding velocity and priority needs
for this particular launch than siloed warfare. [4]_ I can only assume
that time will tell, but I've got a feeling there should be at least one
internal evangelist currently crusading on this topic.

Now if you excuse me, I'm going back to the maze. I really want to win
that adventure club watch for my avatar...

----

.. [1] Anyone hate me if I use the word *xboxted* for this purpose?

.. [2] I am willing to bet that I'm not the only person thinking or
   shouting "Johnny 5, Alive!" when the Kinect goes through its boot-up
   recalibration.

.. [3] Might we say, "Apple-like"?

.. [4] Go Team XAML, though! If one silo has to "win", as a .NET
   Developer I can't but help to express my interest in seeing the
   Windows Phone 7 "Silverlight-everywhere" approach succeed.
