---
date: 2013-06-30 19:18:29.991672
db_id: 1156
db_updated: 2013-06-30 19:18:29.991699
layout: post
tags: Louisville
title: Underpassing
---
As a resident of Downtown Louisville that enjoys interestingly long
walks, I walk under a lot of different overpasses and have some time to
ponder them while I do so.

The big news here is that in the next few months I-65 through Downtown,
and particularly in my home neighborhood between Main and Market
Streets, will be expanding from a *mere* six lanes into a twelve lane
monstrosity. [1]_ This will be nearly half a downtown block wide. It
will push what is an already deep cut splitting neighborhoods into a
seemingly impassible divide.

I'm sure that it is probably too late to enter into a debate with the
current work, as the engineering has already happened and construction
has already started in several ways, but I do think a deeper dialog
needs to happen on how this expanded overpass will interact with the
neighborhood it lives in (and divides).

Based on what I've experienced of which overpasses I feel like hurt the
city and which provide interesting flavor instead, I think the big
common factor is that Waterfront Park has helped to contextualize its
overpasses as brief shady spots in its park. I'd like to hope the same
or similar could be accomplished (perhaps not today, but maybe not in
the too distant future) with I-65 overpass, at the very least in block
between Main and Market, but potentially for a longer swath of its
frustrating wall through the heart of Downtown Louisville. I would like
to call for, in whatever ways I can manage, some attempt to build a
linear park underneath and as a part of the I-65 expansion.

Another example of an overpass that works today is the underside of the
George Rogers Clark bridge [2]_ as it was recently renovated thanks to
the Yum Center. Forgiving the fact that the underside of the bridge
still has to remain a working street, the lighting and curb work go far
to make this overpass feel lively and welcoming, even at night.

.. raw:: html

   <iframe src="https://skydrive.live.com/embed?cid=CD7C80B1FAC13044&resid=CD7C80B1FAC13044%211273&authkey=AOrmHV2KHkg_EzA" width="180" height="320" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

To compare, the existing I-65 is a space-wasting berm between Main and
Market.

.. raw:: html

   <iframe src="https://skydrive.live.com/embed?cid=CD7C80B1FAC13044&resid=CD7C80B1FAC13044%211277&authkey=AMTmuCwU39nNIbY" width="320" height="180" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

It already does so much to cut this block and wall it off, discouraging
foot traffic across blocks, disconnecting Main and Market; Hancock and
Jackson Streets. It may have a pretty mural, but it's still a physical
wall.

.. raw:: html

   <iframe src="https://skydrive.live.com/embed?cid=CD7C80B1FAC13044&resid=CD7C80B1FAC13044%211281&authkey=AKuRzSMuv8yQ0Nk" width="320" height="180" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

As it widens to twelve lines we need to ask ourselves how the public
space is utilized. At what will be nearly a half-block of downtown
exactly, I think it is absolutely apparent that this could be put to use
as an interesting linear park, connecting rather than disconnecting the
neighborhoods here. Expanding such a park south along the path of I-65
over time would further add to the fabric of downtown.

Possibly something like this is already the plan, but I'm sure that the
current berm/wall is the cheaper solution and probably the current
engineering intent. It certainly could be open, as the side just north
of Main is already open [3]_. It's just not well lit or that interesting
of a view, currently.

.. raw:: html

   <iframe src="https://skydrive.live.com/embed?cid=CD7C80B1FAC13044&resid=CD7C80B1FAC13044%211280&authkey=AHY1-7bo6dMcth4" width="320" height="180" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

Maybe it isn't too late to have this conversation. Even if it is too
late to impact the economics of whatever exactly the current plan is, we
can at least highlight this as a future development and push for that
future to happen sooner, rather than later. The city doesn't need half
of a block disconnecting its downtown from itself. We need something at
ground level to compensate for the interstates that are being expanded
to serve those that don't actually care about Downtown Louisville [4]_.
I think something needs to be done. Preferably sooner, rather than
later.

----

.. [1] I've ranted at length about how much I believe this to be a
   mistake, but I realize the devil's bargain the city has placed itself
   into here. In order to build the bridge the city actually needs (the
   East End I-265 bridge) we saddled our poor downtown with a Spaghetti
   Junction reflow it could use, but didn't entirely need need, and a
   bridge that likely won't be that necessary once the East End bridge
   is built, and we agreed to do both (at the same time!) to beat the
   crowd that insisted in attempting to make the combined project "too
   big to build". I've given up on fighting the downtown parts of the
   project. The East End Rich "won" and we that love Louisville's downtown
   will put up with our misery as best we can, because eventually we'll
   get what we actually need (the East End bridge).
.. [2] Or as we biased Louisvillians prefer to call it, the Second
   Street Bridge.
.. [3] Probably due to the way it interfaces with the city's flood wall.
.. [4] Both the East Enders that fought to bundle these projects and the
   logistics and trucking industries that are more concerned about
   quickly travel to Indianapolis or Nashville more than about coming,
   and staying, to Downtown Louisville.
